 14


CRYPTAB/ABS PED- TROP NEO NOV POS TEN MONO UNI NumberWords
Quiz14-1 Quiz14-2 Quiz14-3 Quiz14-4 Quiz14-5 ReviewQuizzes14

CRYPT comes from the Greek word for "hidden." To encrypta message is to encode it -thatis, to hide it s meaning in code language. When a scientific term begins with crypto-, italways means that there's something hidden aboutit .
 
crypt      (1) A room completely or part ly underground, especially under the main floor of a church. (2) A room or area in a large aboveground t omb.


E.g.
 His old night mare was of being locked in a crypt with corpses as his only companions.


Hidden under the main floor of a greatchurch is often a large room, often with a t omb as it s centerpiece. Many major European churches were  built  over the  remains  of  a  saint -the Vatican's great St . Peter's Basilica is an example-and instead of having the coffin buried, it was often given it s spacious room below ground level. In a large aboveground t omb, or mausoleum, there may be several small chambers for individual coffins, also called crypt s; when the comic book Tales from the Crypt made it s firstappearance in 1950, it was this meaning that the authors were referring t o.
 
encrypt                     (1) To convertinto cipher. (2) To converta message into code.


E.g.
 Messages on the group's Web site are encrypted in code words to keep law-enforcementagent s from understanding them.


Codes aren'talways in another language; people have always been able to communicate in ways that conceal their real meaning. In countries ruled by dictat ors, novelist s and playwright s have sometimes managed to encrypt their messages, conveying political ideas to their audiences so that the authorities never notice. Butencryption t oday usually refers to a complex procedure performed on electronic text to make sure the wrong people-whether a nation's enemies or a business competit or (most businesses use encryption t oday)-can'tread it . And sensitive data that merely resides on a company's own  computers  is  often encrypted as well.
 
cryptic                    (1) Mysterious; puzzlingly short . (2) Acting to hide or conceal.


E.g.
 From across the room, Louisa threw Philip a cryptic look, and he puzzled over what she was trying to tell him.


Until the writing on the famous Roset ta St one was finally translated in the early 19th century, Egyptian hieroglyphic writing was entirely cryptic, it s meaning hidden from the modern world. In the same way, a cryptic commentis one whose meaning is unclear, and a cryptic note may leave you wondering. Cryptic coloring among plant s and animals act s like camouflage; so, for example, some moths thatare tasty to blue jays are cryptically colored to look like bugs that jays won't t ouch.
 
crypt ography                    (1)  Secret  writing. (2)  The  encoding  and  decoding  of messages.


E.g.
 As a graduate st udentin mathematics, she never dreamed she would end up working in crypt ography for the Defense Depart ment .


During World War I, crypt ography became an extremely complex science for both the Allied and Axis powers. The Allies managed to secret ly crack the code produced by the Nazis' Enigma machine, and thereby may have shortened the war by two years. The Axis cryptographers, on the other hand, never managed to crack the Americans' ultimate code-the spoken languages of the Navajo and other American  Indians. In  the  age  of  computers, crypt ography has become almost unbelievably complex; it 's widely used in peacetime in such areas as banking telecommunications.
 
AB/ABS comes to us from Latin, and means "from," "away," or "off." Abuse is the use of something in the wrong way. To abductis to "lead away from" or kidnap. Aberrant behavior is behavior that "wanders away from" whatis acceptable. But there are so many words thatinclude these root s thatit would be absurd to try to list them all here.
 
abscond To departin secretand hide.


E.g.
 They  discovered  the  next  morning  that  their  guest  had  absconded  with  most  of  the silverware during the night .


Wagner's massive four-part opera The Ring of the Nibelung begins with a dwarf absconding with gold which he turns into a magic ring. And in J. R. R. Tolkien's The Hobbit, Bilbo Baggins absconds from Gollum's caves with the ring he has found, the ring Gollum calls "my precious"; what follows is detailed in the three-volume Lord of the Rings. (Tolkien knew Wagner's opera well.) A young couple mightabscond from their parent s to get married, but sooner or later they must face those parent s again.
 
abstemious
 Restrained, especially in the consumption of food or alcohol.


E.g.
 Her parent s had lefther two million dollars when they died, having been so abstemious for years that their neighbors all assumed they were poor.


Many 14th-century monks lived by the Rule of St . Benedict , which demands an abstemious life of obedience and poverty. But notall monks could maintain such abstemious habit s. Chaucer's Canterbury Tales contains a portrait of a fat monk who is supposed to follow a vegetarian diet butinstead is an enthusiastic hunter who loves a juicy swan best . He justifies breaking the Rule by saying thatit 's old-fashioned and thathe's just keeping up with modern times. Abstemious it self has  a slight ly  old-fashioned sound t oday, especially  in a country  where everyone is constant ly encouraged to consume.
 
abstraction
      The consideration of a thing or idea withoutassociating it with a particular example.


E.g.
 All the ideas she came up with in class were abstractions, since she had no experience of actual nursing atall.


From it s root s, abstraction should mean basically "something pulled or drawn away." So abstractartis art thathas moved away from painting object s of the ordinary physical world in order to show something beyond it . Theories are often abstractions; so a theory abouteconomics, for instance, may "pull back" to take a broad view that somehow explains all of economics (but maybe doesn'tend up explaining any of it very successfully). An abstract of a medical or scientific article is a one-paragraph summary of it s content s-thatis, the basic findings "pulled out " of the article.
 
abstruse                        Hard to understand; deep or complex.


E.g.
 In every class he fills the blackboard with abstruse calculations, and we usually leave more confused than ever.


The original meaning of abstruse, coming almost straight from the Latin, was "concealed, hidden." It 's easy to see how the word soon came to describe the kind of language used by those who possess certain kinds of expert knowledge (and don't necessarily want to share it with other people). Scientific writing is often filled with the kind of abstruse special vocabulary that 's necessary for exactand precise descriptions. Unfort unately, the language of a science like quant um physics can make an already difficult subjecteven more abstruse to the average person.
 

 
PED- comes from the Greek word for "child." The same rootalso has the meaning "foot " (see
PED), butin English words it usually isn'thard to tell the two apart .
 
pedagogy
    The art , science, or profession of teaching.


E.g.
 His own pedagogy is extremely original; it sometimes alarms school officials buthis st udent s love it .


Since in Greek agogos means "leader," a paidagogos was a slave who led boys to school and back, butalso taught them manners and t ut ored them after school. In time, pedagogue came to mean simply "teacher"; t oday the word has an old-fashioned ring to it , so it often means a st uffy, boring teacher. The word pedagogy, though, is still widely used, and often means simply "teaching." And pedagogic training is whateveryone majoring in education receives.
 
pedant           (1) A formal, unimaginative teacher. (2) A person who shows off his or her learning.


E.g.
 At one time or another, every st udentencounters a pedant who can make even the mostinteresting subject tedious.


Itisn'talways easy to tell a pedantic teacher from one who is simply thorough. Some professors getan undeserved reputation for pedantry from st udent s who just don't like the subject much. Regardless of that , a pedant need not be a teacher; anyone who goes around displaying his or her knowledge in a boring way can qualify.
 
pediatrician
   A doct or who specializes in the diseases, development , and care of children.


E.g.
 Children in the U.S. usually see a pediatrician until they turn at least 15 or 16.


Since iatros means "physician" in Greek (see IATR), words such as pediatric naturally refer to "children's medicine." Pediatrics is a fairly new medical specialty; until about 1900, children were considered small adult s and given the same medical treat ment , only milder. Benjamin Spock was the most famous pediatrician of the 20th century, and his book Baby and Child Care changed the way millions of Americans raised their children.
 
encyclopedic
   (1) Of or relating to an encyclopedia. (2) Covering a wide range of subject s.


E.g.
 Someone  with  the  kind  of  encyclopedic  knowledge  she  has  should  be  competing  on
Jeopardy.


In Greek, paidaea meant not simply "child-rearing" butalso "education," and kyklios meant "general"; thus, an encyclopedia is a work broad enough to provide a kind of general education. The world's mosteminent general encyclopedia, the Encyclopaedia Britannica, is a huge work that covers every field of human knowledge. Butencyclopedic doesn'thave to refer to books; it 's often used to describe the wide-ranging knowledge that certain types of minds just can't st op acquiring.
 
TROP comes from the Greek tropos, meaning "turn" or "change." The troposphere is the level of the at mosphere where most weather changes-or "turns in the weather"-occur. And the Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn are the lines of latit ude where the sun is direct ly overhead when itreaches it s northernmostand southernmost point s, on about June 22 and December 22 every year-thatis, the point where it seems to turn and go back the other way.
 
tropism                       Aut omatic movement by an organism unable to move about from place to place, especially a plant , thatinvolves turning or growing t oward or away from a stimulus.


E.g.
 The new president was soon showing a tropism for bold action, a tendency that seemed more the result of instinct than of careful thought .


In hydrotropism, a plant 's root s grow in the direction of increasing moisture, hoping to obtain water. In phototropism, a plant (or  fungus)  moves t oward light , usually the sun-perhaps because, in the colder climates where such plant s are usually found, concentrating the sun's warmth within the sun-seeking flower can create a warm and inviting environment for the insect s that fertilize it . In thigmotropism, the organism moves in response to being t ouched; most climbing plant s, for example, put out tiny tendrils that feel around for something solid and then at tach themselves or curl around it . When microbiologist s talk about tropism, however, they're often referring instead to the way a virus will seek outa particular type of cell to infect . And when intellectuals use the word, they usually mean a tendency shown by a person or group which they themselves might noteven be aware of.
 
entropy                        (1) The decomposition of the mat ter and energy in the universe to an ultimate state of inactive uniformity. (2) Chaos, randomness.


E.g.
 The apart menthad been reduced to an advanced state of entropy, as if a tiny t ornado had t orn through it , shat tering it s content s and mixing the pieces t ogether in a crazy soup.


With it s Greek prefix en-, meaning "within," and the trop- roothere meaning "change," entropy basically means "change within (a closed system)." The closed system we usually think of when speaking of entropy (especially if we're not physicist s) is the entire universe. Butentropy applies to closed systems of any size. Entropy is seen when the ice in a glass of water in a warm room melt s-thatis, as the temperature of everything in the room evens out . In a slight ly different type of entropy, a drop of food coloring in that glass of water soon spreads outevenly. However, when a nonphysicist uses the word, he or she is usually trying to describe a large-scale collapse.
 
heliotrope                      Any of a genus of herbs or shrubs having small white or purple flowers.


E.g.
 A long bank of purple heliotrope lined the walkway, and her guest s were always remarking on the flowers' glorious fragrance.


Helios was the god of the sun in Greek mythology, and helio- came to appear in a number of sun-related English words. The genus known as the heliotropes consist s of about 250 species; many are thought of as weeds, but the best -known species, garden heliotrope, is a popular and fragrant perennial thatresembles the forget -me-not . The heliotrope tends to follow the sun-thatis, turn it s blossoms t oward the sun as it travels from East to Westevery day. But  the factis, heliotropism-turning t oward the sun-is common among flowers (and  even leaves), and some, like the sunflower, are more dramatically heliotropic than the heliotrope. Those in the far North actually use their petals to reflect the sun's heat onto the flower's central ovary during the short growing season.
 
psychotropic
    Acting on the mind.


E.g.
 My mother is taking two drugs that may produce psychotropic side effect s, and I'm worried that they might be interacting.


Psychotropic is used almostalways to describe  substances  that  we  consume.  Such substances  are  more  numerous than you  might  think, and  some  have  been  known  for thousands  of years. Native  American  religions,  for  example,  have  used  psychotropic substances derived from certain cact uses and mushrooms for centuries. Caffeine and nicotine can be called psychotropic. Psychotropic prescription drugs include antidepressant s (such as Prozac) and tranquilizers (such as Valium). Any medication that blocks pain, from aspirin to the anesthetics used during surgery, can be considered a psychotropic drug. Even children are now prescribed psychotropic drugs, often to treatat tention deficit disorder. And all recreational drugs are psychotropic. Psychoactive is a common synonym of psychotropic.
 

 
NEO comes from the Greek neos, meaning "new." Neo- has become a part of many English words. Some are easy to understand; for example, neo-Nazi. Some are less so; you might notimmediately guess that neotropical means "from the tropics of the New World,"  or thata neophyte is a "newcomer." When William Ramsay discovered four new gases, he named them all using Greek root s thatat first glance might sound slight ly mysterious: argon ("idle"), krypton ("hidden"), xenon ("strange")-and neon ("new").
 
neoclassic                        Relating to a revival or adaptation of the styles of ancient Greece and Roman, especially in music, art , or architecture.


E.g.
 He had always admired the paintings of the French neoclassical masters, especially Poussin and Ingres.


In the art s and architecture, a style thathas existed for a long time usually produces a reaction againstit . So after the showy style of Europe's so-called baroque era (from about 1600 to the early 1700s), the reaction came in the form of the neoclassical movement , bringing order, restraint , and simpler and more conservative structures, whether in plays, sonatas, sculptures, or public buildings. It s inspiration was the art of ancient Greece and Rome-thatis, of classical antiquity. Why classicalE.g.
 In Latin classicus meant "of the highest class," so in English classic and classical originally described the bestancient Greek and Latin literature, but soon came to mean simply "of ancient Greek and Rome," since these were already seen as the highestand best cultures. Neoclassic generally describes art works from the 1700s or early 1800s (by the painter David, the composer Mozart , the sculpt or Canova, et c.), butalso works from the 20th century that seem to have been inspired by the ideals of Greece and Rome.
 
Neolithic
 Of or relating to the latest period of the St one Age, when polished st one t ools were used.


E.g.
 Around the Mediterranean, the Neolithic period was a time of trade, of st ock breeding, and of the first use of pot tery.


Since lithos in Greek means "st one," the Neolithic period is the "new" or "late" period of the St one Age, in contrast to the Paleolithic period ("old" or "early" period-see PALEO) and the Mesolithic period ("middle" period) of the St one Age. The use of polished st one t ools came to different part s of the world at different times, but the Neolithic Age is usually said to begin around 9000 B.C. and to end around 3000 B.C., when the Bronze Age begins. The Neolithic is the era when the farming of plant s and animals begins, and when, as a result , humans first begin to create permanent set t lement s.
 
neoconservative
  A    conservative    who    favors    strongly encouraging democracy and the U.S. national interestin world affairs, including through military means.


E.g.
 Many believed that foreign policy in those years had fallen into the hands of the neoconservatives, and that the war in Iraq was one result .


In the 1960s several well-known socialistintellectuals, including Norman Podhoret z and Irving Krist ol, alarmed by growing political extremism on the left , began to move in the other direction. Soon the term neoconservative (or neocon for short ) was being at tached to them. Rather than simply drifting t oward the political center, Podhoret z and Krist ol actually moved far to the right , especially on the issue of maintaining a strong military stance t oward the rest of the world. The main magazine of neoconservatism became Podhoret z's Commentary; it  was later joined by the Weekly Standard, edited by Krist ol's son William. Noteveryone agrees on how to define these terms; still, it 's clear that t oday you don'thave to be a former liberal in order to be a neoconservative.
 
neonatal
  Of or relating to babies in the first month after their birth.


E.g.
 The hospital's newestaddition is a neonatal intensive-care unit , and newborns in critical condition are already being sent there from considerable distances.


Part ly  based  on  the  Latin natus,   "born," neonatal  means  "newly  born."  Neonatal  babies themselves are called neonates. Mosthospitals now offer neonatal screening, which is used to detect diseases thatare treatable only if identified during the first days of life, and specialized neonatal nursing as well. But despite spending much money on neonatal care, the U.S. still ranks lower than some much less wealthy countries (such as the Czech Republic, Port ugal, and Cuba) in infant mortality (infant deaths).
 
NOV comes from the Latin word novus, meaning "new." To renovate an old house is to "make it new again"-thatis, putit back in tip-t op shape. The long-running PBS show Nova keeps it s large audience up to date on what 's new in the world of science. And when the British king sent Scot tish set t lers to a large island off Canada's At lantic coastin the 17th century, he named it Nova Scotia, or "New Scot land."
 
novice                   (1) One who has no previous training or experience in a specific field or activity; beginner. (2) A new member of a religious order who is preparing to become a nun or monk.


E.g.
 It 's hard to believe thata year ago she was a complete novice as a gardener, who couldn'tidentify a cornstalk.


Among the ancientromans, a novice (novicius) was usually a newly imported slave, who had to be trained in his or her duties. Among Catholics and Buddhist s, if you desire to become a priest , monk, or nun, you must serve as a novice for a period of time, often a year (called your novitiate), before being ordained or fully professing your vows. No mat ter what kind of novice you are-at computers, at writing, at politics, et c.-you've gota lot to learn.
 
novel                (1) New and notresembling something formerly known or used. (2) Original and striking, especially in conception or style.


E.g.
 His techniques for dealing with these disturbed young people were novel, and they caught the at tention of the instit ute's direct or.


If someone tells you thatyou've come up with a  novel idea  or a  novel interpretation  of something, it 's probably a compliment : noteveryone is capable of original thinking. But noteverything new is terribly worthwhile; a novelty, for example, is often a cute (or maybe just silly) lit t le object thatyou might put on a display shelf in your house. It may seem surprising that the familiar noun novel is related as well. In the 14th  century, Italian  writers  began  writing collections of short tales, each of which they called a novella because itrepresented a new literary form; from this word, three centuries later, the English coined the noun novel.
 
innovation                           (1) A new idea, device, or method. (2) The introduction of new ideas, devices, or methods.


E.g.
 "Smooshing" bit s of candy into ice cream while the cust omer watched was just one of his innovations that later got copied by chains of ice-cream out let s.


Innovation is a word that 's almostalways connected with business. In business t oday, it 's almosta rule thata company that doesn'tinnovate is destined for failure. The mostimportantand successful businesses were usually started by innovators. And company managers should always at least listen to the innovative ideas of their employees.
 
supernova
(1)  The  explosion  of  a  star  that  causes  it to become extremely bright . (2) Something thatexplodes into prominence or popularity.


E.g.
 After exploding, a nova leaves a "white dwarf" which may explode again in the future, buta supernova destroys the entire star.


A nova, despite it s name, isn'tactually a "new" star, butrather one that wasn't noticed until itexploded, when it may increase in bright ness by a million times before returning to it s previous state a few days later. A supernova is far larger; a star in it s supernova state may emita billion  times as much lightas previously. After a few weeks it begins to dim, until iteventually ceases to exist ; it 's often replaced by a black hole. (Though remains that were shot outinto space may survive; those of a great supernova seen in A.D. 1054 are now known as the Crab Nebula.) All this may serve as a warning to those human stars whose fame explodes t oo rapidly; supernovas of this kind have sometimes vanished by the following year.
 

 
POS comes from the Latin verb ponere, meaning "to put " or "to place." You expose film by "placing it out " in the light . You compose a song by "put ting t ogether" a series of notes. And you oppose locating a new prison in your t own by "put ting yourself against " it .
 
impose               (1) To establish or apply as a charge or penalty or in a forceful or harmful way. (2) To take unfair advantage.


E.g.
 After seeing her latest grades, her parent s imposed new rules abouthow much time she had to spend on homework every night .


The Latin imposui meant "put upon," and that meaning carried over into English in impose. A CEO may impose a new manager on one of the company's plant s. A state may impose new taxes on luxury items or cigaret tes, and the federal government sometimes imposes trade restrictions on another country to punish it . A polite apology might begin with "I hope I'm notimposing on you" (thatis, "forcing my presence on you"). And a self-imposed deadline is one thatyou decide to hold yourself t o.
 
juxtapose
   To place side by side.


E.g.
 You won't  notice the difference bet ween the original and the copy unless you juxtapose them.


Since juxta means "near" in Latin, it 's easy to see how juxtapose was formed. Juxtaposing is generally done for examination or effect . Interior designers constant ly make decisions about juxtaposing object s and colors for the best  effect . Juxtaposing two video clips showing the different things thata politician said about the same subjectat two different times can be an effective means of criticizing. The juxtaposition of two similar X-rays can help medical st udent s distinguish bet ween two conditions that may be hard to tell apart . And advertisement s frequent ly juxtapose "before" and "after" images to show a thrilling transformation.
 
transpose                      (1) To change the position or order of (two things). (2) To move from one place or period to another.


E.g.
 She rechecked the phone number and discovered that two digit s had been transposed.


Though transposing two digit s can be disastrous, transposing two let ters in a word often doesn't mat ter t oo much. (You can prboalby raed tihs set nence wit ohut t oo mcuh t oruble.) Transposing two words or sounds-as in "Can I sew you to another sheet E.g.
"-has been a good source of humor over the years. Doct ors sometimes discover that something in the body
-a nerve, an organ, et c.-has been transposed, or moved away from it s proper place. For musicians, transposing means changing the key of a piece; if you can do this ata moment 's notice, you've been well trained.
 
superimpose
   To put or place one thing over something else.


E.g.
 Using transparent sheet s, she superimposes territ ory boundaries on an out line of Africa, showing us how these changed in the late 19th and early 20th century.


Superimposition was one of the magical effect s employed by early filmmakers. Using "mirror shot s," with semitransparent mirrors setat 45бу angles to the scene, they would superimpose shadowy images of ghost s or scenes from a character's past onto scenes from the present . Superimposing your own ideas on something, such as a hist orical event , has to be done carefully, since your ideas may change whenever you learn something new about the event .
 
TEN, from the Latin verb tenere, basically means "hold" or "hold on t o." A tenantis the "holder" of an apart ment , house, or land, but not necessarily the owner. A lieutenant governor may "hold the position" ( "serve in lieu") of the governor when necessary.
 
tenure                 (1) The amount of time thata person holds a job, office, or tit le. (2) The right to keep a job, especially the job of teacher or professor.


E.g.
 I know two assistant professors who are so worried about being denied tenure this year that they can't sleep.


Tenure is aboutholding on to something, almostalways a job or position. So you can speak of someone's 30-year tenure as chairman, or someone's brief tenure in the sales manager's office. But tenure means something slight ly differentin the academic world. In American colleges and universities, the best (or luckiest ) teachers have traditionally been granted a lifetime appoint ment known as tenure after about six years of teaching. Almost nobody has as secure a job as a tenured professor, but get ting tenure can be difficult , and most of them have earned it .
 
tenacious
  St ubborn or determined in clinging to something.


E.g.
 He was known as a tenacious reporter who would stay with a st ory for months, risking his health and sometimes even his life.


Success in most fields requires a tenacious spiritand a drive to achieve. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the entertainment business. Thousands of act ors and actresses work tenaciously to build a TV or film career. But without talent or beauty, tenacity is rarely rewarded, and only a few become stars.
 
tenable                         Capable of being held or defended; reasonable.


E.g.
 She was depressed for weeks after her professor said thather theory wasn't tenable.


Tenable means "holdable." In the pastit was often used in a physical sense-for example, to refer to a city thatan army was trying to "hold" militarily againstan enemy force. But nowadays it 's almostalways used when speaking of "held" ideas and theories. If you hold an opinion butevidence appears that completely contradict s it , your opinion is no longer tenable. So, for example, the old ideas that cancer is infectious or that being bled by leeches can cure your whooping cough now seem untenable.
 
tenet                   A widely held principle or belief, especially one held in common by members of a group or profession.


E.g.
 It was soon obvious that the  new owners didn't share the tenet s that the company's founders had held to all those years.


A tenetis something we hold, but not with our hands. Tenet s are often ideals, butalso often statement s of faith. Thus, we may speak of the tenet s of Islam or Hinduism, the tenet s of Western democracy, or the tenet s of the scientific method, and in each case these tenet s may combine element s of both faith and ideals.
 

 
Number Words

MONO comes from the Greek monos, meaning "along" or "single." So a monorail is a railroad thathas only one rail; a monocle is an old-fashioned eyeglass thata gent leman used to squeeze into his eye socket ; a monotonous voice seems to have only one t one; and a monopoly put s all ownership of a type of product or service in the hands of a single company.
 
monogamous
    Being married to one person or having one mate ata time.


E.g.
 Geese, swans, and most other birds are monogamous and mate for life.


American marriage is by law monogamous; people are permit ted to have only one spouse (husband or wife) ata time. There are cultures with laws that permit marriage to more than one person ata time, or polygamy. Some Islamic countries permit polygamy, as do some African tribes. In this country the Mormons were polygamous until 1890, when they were forced to adopt monogamy by the unsympathetic federal government .
 
monoculture
    (1) The cultivation of a single crop to the exclusion of other uses of land. (2) A culture dominated by a single element .


E.g.
 Monoculture is practiced on a vast scale in the American Midwest , where nothing but corn can be seen in the fields for hundreds of square miles.


The Irish Potato Famine of 1845-49, which led to the deaths of over a million people, resulted from the monoculture of potat oes, which were destroyed by a terrible blight , leaving farmers nothing else to eat . Almostevery traditional farming society has practiced crop rotation, the planting of different crops on a given piece of land from year to year, so as to keep the soil from losing it s quality. Butin the modern world, monoculture has become the rule on the largest commercial farms, where the same crop can be planted year after year by means of the intensive use of fertilizers. Modern monoculture has produced huge crops; on a large scale, it permit s greatefficiency in planting, pest control, and harvesting. But many expert s believe this all comes ata huge cost to the environment .
 
monolithic
(1) Appearing to be a huge, featureless, often rigid whole. (2) Made up of material with no joint s or seams.


E.g.
 The sheer monolithic rock face of Yosemite's El Capitan looks impossible to climb, butit s cracks and seams are enough for experienced rock climbers.


The -lith in monolith comes from the Greek lithos, "st one," so monolith in it s original sense means a huge st one like those at St onehenge. What 's so impressive about monoliths is that they have no separate part s or pieces. To the lone individual, any huge instit ution or government  bureaucracy can seem monolithic. But  the truth may be different : The former
U.S.S.R. once seemed monolithic and indestructible to the West , butin the 1990s it crumbled into a number of independentrepublics.
 
monotheism
        The worship of a single god.


E.g.
 Christian monotheism finally triumphed in the Roman Empire in A.D. 392, when the worship of pagan gods and goddesses was forbidden.


The monotheism of the ancienthebrews had to combat the polytheism (worship of many gods) of the surrounding peoples from the earliest times. As the Bible relates, several times in their hist ory the Hebrews turned away from their monotheistic beliefs and accepted foreign gods, such as those imported by King Solomon. Each time their own God would punish them for their disloyalty, and the people of Israel would return to monotheism. Today Judaism shares it s monotheism with two much larger religions, Christianity and Islam.
 
UNI comes from the Latin word for "one." A uniform is a single design worn by everyone. A united group has one single opinion, or forms a single unit. A unitard is a one-piece combination leotard and tight s, very good for skating, skiing, dancing-or riding a one-wheeled unicycle.
 
unicameral
     Having only one lawmaking chamber.


E.g.
 In China, with it s unicameral system of government , a single group of legislat ors meet s to make the laws.


Unicameral means "one-chambered," and the term almostalways describes a governing body. Our federal legislature, like those of most democracies, is bicameral, with two legislative (lawmaking) bodies-the Senate and the House of Representatives. And except for Nebraska, all the state legislatures are also bicameral. So why did the nation decide on a bicameral systemE.g.
 Part ly in order to keep some power out of the hands of ordinary voters, who the Founding Fathers didn't completely trust . For thatreason, the original Constit ution states that senat ors are to be elected by the state  legislatures; not  until 1914, after passage  of  a Constit utional amendment , did we first cast direct votes for our senat ors.
 
unilateral
   (1) Done by one person or party; one-sided. (2) Affecting one side of the body.


E.g.
 The Japanese Constit ution of 1947 includes a unilateral rejection of warfare as an option for their country.


The world is a smaller place than it used to be, and we get uncomfortable when a single nation adopt s a policy of unilateralism-thatis, acting independent ly with lit t le regard for what the rest of the world thinks. A unilateral invasion of another country, for instance, usually looks like a grab for power and resources. But occasionally the world welcomes a unilateral action, as when the U.S. announced unilateral nuclear-arms reductions in the early 1990s. Previously, such reductions had only happened as part of bilateral ("t wo-sided") agreement s with the old Soviet Union. Multilateral agreement s, on issues such as climate change, often involve most of the world's nations.
 
unison
(1) Perfectagreement . (2) Sameness of musical pitch.


E.g.
 Unable to read music well enough to harmonize, the village choir sang only in unison.


This word usually appears in the phrase "in unison," which means "t ogether, at the same time" or "at the same musical pitch." So an excited crowd responding to a speaker may shoutin unison, and a group of demonstrat ors may chantin unison. The old church music called Gregorian chant  was writ ten to be sung in unison, with no harmonizing voices, and kindergarten kids always sing in unison (at least when they can all find the same pitch). In a similar way, an aerobics class moves in unison following the instruct or, and a group or even a whole t own may work in unison when everyone agrees on a common goal.
 
unitarian
      Relating or belonging to a religious group that believes that God exist s only in one person and stresses individual freedom of belief.


E.g.
 With his unitarian tendencies, he wasn't likely to getinto fight s over religious beliefs.


Unitarianism, originally a sect of Christianity believing in a single or unitary God, grew up in 18th-century England and developed in America in the early 19th century. Though they believe in Christ 's teaching, they reject the idea of the three-part Trinity-God as father, son, and holy spirit -and thus deny that Christ was divine, so some  people  don't  consider  them  truly Christian. In this century the Unitarians joined with the Universalist Church, a movement founded on a belief in universal salvation-thatis, the saving of every soul from damnation after death. Both have always been liberal and fairly small; t oday they countabouthalf a million members. Withouta capital let ter, unitarian refers simply to belief in a unitary God, or in unity within some nonreligious system.
 

 

 
