 17


ANIM FIG ANN/ENN EV CORP TANG/TACT CODI/CODE SIGN QUADR/QUART TETR Number
Words
Quiz17-1 Quiz17-2 Quiz17-3 Quiz17-4 Quiz17-5 ReviewQuizzes17

ANIM comes from the Latin anima, meaning "breath" or "soul." So, for example, an animal is a living, breathing thing-though human animals have often argued about whether other species actually have souls.
 
animated
    (1) Full of life; lively, vigorous, active. (2) Seeming or appearing to be alive.


E.g.
 Her gestures as she talked were so animated thateven people across the room were watching her.


Animated cart oon characters have been "given life" by film techniques, though the animation of drawings actually goes back to handheld t oys in the 1830s. A child watching the cart oon may also be animated-squealing, laughing, and jumping around-as can a crowd of hockey fans or a rock-concertaudience. And the best discussions and argument s are often highly animated.
 
magnanimous
  (1)  Showing  a  lofty  and  courageous  spirit .  (2) Generous and forgiving.


E.g.
 She was magnanimous in vict ory, saying she'd been lucky to win and praising her opponent 's effort .


The basic meaning of magnanimity is "great ness of spirit ." Thus, magnanimity is the opposite of pet tiness or "smallness." A truly magnanimous person can lose without complaining and win without gloating. Angry disputes can sometimes be resolved when one side makes a magnanimous gesture t oward the other. And it 's the mark of magnanimity to give credit to everyone who worked on a projecteven if you'd rather itall went to you.
 
animosity
   Ill will or resent ment .


E.g.
 Legend has it that  the animosity bet ween the Greeks and the Trojans began with the stealing of the beautiful Helen from her husband, Menelaus.


The important  Latin word animus (very closely related to anima) could mean a great  many things having to do with the soul and the emotions, one of them being "anger." As an English word, animus has generally meant "ill will," so itisn't mysterious thatanimosity means basically the same thing. Animosity can exist bet ween two people, two groups or organizations, or two countries, and can sometimes lie hidden for years before reappearing. The deep animosities thatexist bet ween certain ethnic and religious groups sometimes seem as if they will last forever.
 
inanimate
   (1) Notalive; lifeless. (2) Not lively; dull.


E.g.
 The sculptures of Rodin are so expressive that , although inanimate, they seem full of life and emotion.


The couch you sit on while you watch TV is an inanimate object , as is your footrest , your bag of snacks, and your remote control. Spend t oo much time on that couch and you risk becoming a couch potat o. (A potato is an inanimate object .)
 
FIG comes from a Latin verb meaning "to shape or mold" and a noun meaning "a form or shape." So a figure is usually a shape. A transfiguration transforms the shape or appearance of something. And a disfiguring injury changes the appearance of part of the body for the worse.
 
figurative
    (1) Representing form or figure in art . (2) Saying one thing in terms normally meaning or describing another thing.


E.g.
 When the poet says he's been living in the desert , it 's a figurative reference to his emotional life.


Words and phrases can have both literal and figurative meanings, and we all use words with both kinds of meanings every day of our lives. We can literally close the door to a room, or we can figuratively close the door to further negotiations-that  is, refuse to take part  in them. Figurative language includes figures of speech, such as similes ("she's been like a sister to me") and metaphors ("a st orm of protest "). And sometimes it 's hard to tell whether a phrase is literal or figurative: If I say I "picked up" a lit t le Spanish in Mexico, is that literal or figurativeE.g.
 You've probably noticed that lot s of the definitions in this book show both a literal meaning (often something physical) and a figurative meaning (often nonphysical).
 
configuration
     An  arrangement  of  part s  or  element s; shape, design.


E.g.
 We've changed the configuration of the office so thatemployees will have more privacy at their desks.


The  term  is  very  common  in  computer  science  and  mathematics, and  in  scientific  and technological fields in general. Thus, for example, two scientist s won a 1962 Nobel Prize for their description of  the  configuration  of  the  DNA molecule. Since  then, researchers  have st udied what different configurations within the DNA strands mean and what they control, and genetic engineers have tried to configure or reconfigure DNA in new ways to prevent or treat diseases.
 
effigy                    An image of a person, especially a crude representation of a hated person.


E.g.
 The night before the big game, an effigy of the rival coach was burned on a huge bonfire.


It was the practice of the ancient Egyptians to bury an effigy of a dead person along with that person's body. The idea was thatif anything happened to the body in the afterlife, the effigy could be used as a spare. Effigy now usually refers to crude st uffed figures of the kind that getabused by angry protest ors and unruly college st udent s. But the small dolls that witches have used to bring pain and death on their victims can be called effigies as well. Actually, those witches and college kids seem to use their effigies for pret ty much the same thing.
 
figment                        Something made up or imagined.


E.g.
 His preference for Cindy is a figment of your imagination; believe me, he barely knows she exist s.


A figmentis something formed from imaginary element s. Daydreams are figment s; night mares are figment s that can seem very real. Most figment s are everyday fears and hopes about small things that turn out to be imaginary. But when the radio play "The War of the Worlds" aired in 1938, it caused a panic among thousands of people who didn'trealize the Martian invasion was justa figment of the author's imagination.
 

 
ANN/ENN comes from Latin annus, meaning "year." An annual event occurs yearly. An anniversary is an example of an annual event , although the older you get the more frequent they seem to be.
 
annuity              Money thatis payable yearly or on some regular basis, or a contract providing for such payment .


E.g.
 Throughouther working career she invested regularly in annuities that would support  her after retirement .


Annuities are handy things to have when you retire, since they provide an income on an annual basis or more frequent ly. Annuities are normally contract s with life-insurance companies that specify that payment s begin atretirement . Company pensions are traditionally doled outin the form of annuities, and sweepstakes jackpot s may also come as annuities. An annuity can be a wise idea if you think you're going to live a long time; however, annuities can be tricky and should only be purchased after carefully comparing the product s offered by various companies.
 
superannuated
         (1) Out worn, old-fashioned, or out -of-date. (2) Forced to retire because of old age or infirmity.


E.g.
 He called himself a car collect or, buthis backyard looked like a cemetery for superannuated clunkers.


A superannuated style is out -of-date-it s time has come and gone. And a person who has passed an age limitand been forced to retire may technically be called superannuated. But more often superannuated describes people who seem somehow to belong to the past . So a 55-year-old surfer might be regarded as superannuated by the young crowd riding the waves in Santa Cruz, and a superannuated hippie might still be dressing the way he did in 1972.
 
millennium                   (1) A period of time lasting 1,000 years, or the celebration of a 1,000-year anniversary. (2) A period of greathappiness and perfection on earth.


E.g.
 The first millennium B.C. saw the rise of important civilizations in Greece, Rome, India, Central America, and China.


Since in Latin mille means "thousand" (see MILL), a millennium last s 1,000 years. Thus, we're living t oday at the beginning of the third millennium since the birth of Christ . But some religious sect s, relying on a prophecy in the biblical Book of Revelation, speak of a coming millennium when Jesus will return to reign on earth for 1,000 years, evil will be banished, and all will live in peace and happiness. Members of these sect s who keep themselves in a constant state of preparedness are called millenarians or millennialists.
 
perennial                           (1) Continuing to grow for several years. (2) Enduring or continuing withoutinterruption.


E.g.
 "See You in September" is a perennial summertime hitamong lovesick teenagers.


A perennial garden is full of perennials like delphiniums and asters, flowers that continue to bloom year after year. (Annuals, by contrast , grow for only a single season and must be replanted annually, and biennials die after two years.) Evergreens are perennially green; for thatreason, they're perennial favorites for Christ mas wreaths and decorations. In a similar way, taxes are a perennial political issue; and a perennial political candidate may come back over and over claiming he's the only one who can save us from them.
 
EV comes from the Latin aevum, "age" or "lifetime." Though the root occurs in only a few English words, it 's related to the Greek aion, "age," from which we get the word eon, meaning "a very long period of time."
 
coeval                       Having the same age or lasting the same amount of time; contemporary.


E.g.
 Homer's Iliad and Odyssey, probably writ ten around 700 B.C., are coeval with portions of the Hebrew Bible, or Old Testament .


Coeval usually describes things thatexisted t ogether for a very long time or that originated at the same time in the distant past . Thus, astronomers might speak of one galaxy as being coeval with another, and a period in the hist ory of one civilization might be coeval with a similar period in another. As a noun, however, coeval may describe people as well; so, for example, two artist s who lived and worked at the same time might be described as coevals.
 
longevity
   (1) A long duration of life. (2) Length of life; long continuance.


E.g.
 Picasso had a career of remarkable longevity, and was producing plentifully until his death at 91.


As living conditions improve and the science of medicine advances, the longevity of  the average American has increased great ly, from about 45 years in 1900 to over 75 years t oday. But the mostimpressive human longevity is nothing compared to the 400-year lifespan of an ocean clam found near Iceland, or the 5,000-year lifespan of the brist lecone pine, a tree found in the western U.S. We may use longevity to talk not only aboutactual lives butalso of the useful "life" of things: the life of your car's tires or the shingles on your roof, for example.
 
medieval
      (1) Relating to the Middle Ages of European hist ory, from about
A.D. 500 to 1500. (2) Extremely out -of-date.


E.g.
 The great cathedral at Chartres in France, finished in 1220, is a masterpiece of medieval architecture.


With it s root s medi-, meaning "middle," and ev-, meaning "age," medieval literally means "of the Middle Ages." In this case, middle means "bet ween the Roman empire and the Renaissance"- thatis, after the fall of the greatroman state and before the "rebirth" of culture that we call the Renaissance. This same period used to be called the "Dark Ages," since it was believed thatin these years civilization all but vanished. And indeed, for most Europeans in these centuries, it was a time of poverty, famine, plague, and superstition, rather than the age of magic, dazzling swordplay, t owering cast les, and knight s in splendid armor displayed in t oday's graphic novels and video games.
 
primeval                       (1) Having to do with the earliest  ages; primitive or ancient . (2) Existing from the beginning.


E.g.
 When European set t lers firstarrived in North America, they found vast tract s of primeval forest , seemingly unt ouched by human influence.


With it s prim- prefix, meaning "first ," primeval obviously refers to an original age. So the word often suggest s the  earliest periods in the  earth's hist ory. Myths are often  st ories of the creation of the world and of it s primeval beings. The trees in a primeval forest (few of which remain t oday in most countries) may be 400 years old-notas old as the world, but maybe as old as they ever live t o. According to scientist s, life on earth began in the protein-rich waters of the primeval seas and swamps, and the decay of their tiny organisms and plant mat ter over millions of years produced our petroleum and coal.
 

 
CORP comes from corpus, the Latin word for "body." A corpse is a dead body. A corporation is also a kind of body, since it may actalmost like an individual. And a corps is a "body" of soldiers.
 
corporeal
   Having or relating to a physical body; substantial.


E.g.
 In paintings, angels usually look very much like corporeal beings, often with actual feathered wings.


In various religions, including Christianity, corporeal existence is often called the opposite of spiritual existence, and corporeal existence, unlike spiritual existence, is often said to be contaminated with evil. The word is also often used by philosophers, especially when considering the nature of reality. For lawyers, corporeal describes physical property such as houses or cars, as opposed to something valuable but nonphysical like a good reputation.
 
corpulent
    Having a large, bulky body; obese.


E.g.
 Squire Jenkins had often been described as "st out " or "port ly," but more recent ly the word his acquaintances were using was usually "corpulent ," or even "fat ."


The Duchess of Windsor may have said thatyou can never be t oo rich or t oo thin, but that 's a rather modern point of view. In earlier times in Europe, being overweight was considered a sign of wealth and well-being, as demonstrated by the corpulence of many European kings. Still t oday, corpulence is thought to be superior to thinness in some of the world's cultures. But corpulentand corpulence are less often used than they once were, and we're now probably more likely to say "obese" and "obesity."
 
corporal                           Relating to or affecting the body.


E.g.
 She was reminded that , in the public-school system, shaking a child was now regarded as unacceptable corporal punishment .


The adjective corporal t oday usually appears in the phrase corporal punishment, which means "bodily punishment ." This used to include such act s as mutilation, branding, imprisonment , and even death. But t oday execution comes under the separate heading of "capital punishment ," which originally involved losing your head (capit- meaning "head"). Milder forms of corporal punishmentare used by American parent s, and were once common in schools as well. Corporal is occasionally used in other ways; in the traditional church, the "corporal works of mercy" include seven helpful act s such as sheltering the homeless and burying the dead. Corporal as a military rank actually comes from caporal-which has the same rootas capital.
 
incorporate
 (1) To blend or combine into something already existing to form one whole. (2) To form or form into a corporation.


E.g.
 The new edition incorporates many suggestions and corrections received by the author from his readers.


From it s root s, incorporate means basically "add into a body" or "form into a body." So, for example, a chef might decide to incorporate a couple of new ingredient s into an old recipe, and then mightincorporate that new item into the restaurant 's dinner menu. The restaurantit self was  probably incorporated at  the beginning, and so is now a corporation-that  is, a "body" that 's legally allowed to act like a single person in certain ways, even if it may have many individual employees. As you can see, the two meanings turn out to be fairly different .
 
TANG/TACT comes from the Latin words tangere, "to t ouch," and tactus, "sense of t ouch." So, for instance, to make contactis to t ouch or "getin t ouch with."
 
tact              The ability to deal with others without offending them.


E.g.
 Already at 16 his daughter showed remarkable tactin dealing with adult s, which she certainly hadn't got ten from him.


This word came to English direct ly from French (a Latin-based language), where it can also mean simply "sense of t ouch." Dealing with difficult situations involving  other people  can require the kind of extreme sensitivity that our fingertips possess. As Lincoln once said, "Tactis the ability to describe others as they see themselves," which doesn't usually come naturally. Someone tactful can soothe the feelings of the most difficult people; a tactless person will generally make a bad situation worse.
 
tactile                   (1) Able to be perceived by t ouching. (2) Relating to the sense of t ouch.


E.g.
 He always enjoyed the tactile sensation of running his hand over the lush turf.


If you setyour cell phone to vibrate rather than ring, you're taking the tactile option. Educat ors believe that some st udent s are naturally "tactile learners," much bet ter at "hands-on" learning than at tasks thatinvolve patient listening and reading. Many longtime readers resist using e- books, saying they miss the tactile sensations of leafing through an actual book. And the blind, using the raised dot s of the braille alphabet , rely entirely on their tactile sense to read; some can actually read as fastas the average person can read out loud.
 
tangential
   Touching light ly; incidental.


E.g.
 The governmentis trying to determine if the extremist s were deeply involved or if their relationship to the suspect was merely tangential.


In geometry, a tangentis a straight line that t ouches a curve ata single point . So we say that someone who start s talking about one thing and get s sidetracked has gone off on a tangent . The new subjectis tangential to the first subject -it t ouches itand moves off in a different direction.
 
tangible                          Able to be perceived, especially by t ouch; physical, substantial.


E.g.
 The snow was tangible evidence that winter had really come.


Something that 's literally tangible can be t ouched. A rock is tangible, and so is a broken window; if the rock is lying next to the window, it could be tangible evidence of vandalism. When we say that the tension in a room is tangible, we mean we feel it so strongly thatit seems almost physical. Butif we're being literal, tension, like hope, happiness, and hunger, is literally intangible-it may  be  real, but  it  can't  be  t ouched. When  lawyers  talk  about  an intangible asset , they might mean something like a company's good reputation-very valuable, but not quite t ouchable.
 

 
CODI/CODE comes from the Latin codex, meaning "trunk of a tree" or "document writ ten on wooden tablet s." A code can be either a set of laws or a system of symbols used to write messages. To encode a message is to write itin code. A genetic code, transmit ted by genes, is a set of instructions for everything from blood type to eye color.
 
codex               A book in handwrit ten form, especially a book of Scripture, classics, or ancient text s.


E.g.
 There on the shelves of the monastery library they saw codex after codex, all carefully copied and illustrated by hand.


In the 3rd and 4th centuries A.D., the codex began to replace the older scroll as the preferred form for longer writings. Unlike the scroll, this wonderful invention permit ted writing on both sides of a sheet , made iteasy to locate a particular passage, and could contain a very long piece of writing. Codices (note this unusual plural form) were usually writ ten on parchment , the specially prepared skin of a sheep or goat , or papyrus, the ancest or of paper. Because codices were handwrit ten, there were few copies of any single codex, and sometimes only a single copy. Today we no longer write our books in longhand, but the modern book has kept basically  the same form as the original codices.
 
codicil           (1) An amendment  or addition  made to a  will. (2) An  appendix or supplement .


E.g.
 With the birth of each new grandchild, the old man added a new codicil to his will.


A codicil is literally a "lit t le codex," a lit t le bit of writing on a small piece of writing material, used to add to or change something abouta larger piece of writing. A codicil to a will can change the terms of the original will completely, so it generally requires wit nesses just like the will it self, though in some states a handwrit ten codicil may not . In mystery novels, such changes have been known to cause murders; in real life, codicils aren't usually quite thatexciting.
 
codify                       To arrange according to a system; classify.


E.g.
 In the  6th  century B.C., the  great statesman Solon newly codified the laws of Athens, replacing the harsh legal code of Draco.


A code is a collection of laws arranged in an orderly way; famous examples include the Code of Hammurabi, from about 1760 B.C. in ancient Babylon, and the Napoleonic Code, produced at Napoleon's orders in 1804. Laws thathave been included in a code have been codified. The rules of baseball differed great ly from one place to another until they were codified by Alexander Cart wrightin 1845; they haven'tchanged much since, though we don't know what Cart wright would say about the designated hit ter.
 

decode  (1) To puta coded message into an understandable form. (2) To find the underlying meaning of; decipher.


E.g.
 The Allies were able to decode many important secret messages sent by the Germans and Japanese in World War I.


T o decode is to take out of code and putinto understandable language. (It s opposite is encode, "to putinto coded form.") But dreams may sometimes also be decoded; psychologist s often try to decode the images of their patient s' dreams so as to understand the emotions behind them. And readers must often decode whata novel or st ory or poem is telling them, which may require two or three readings. Decipher is often a synonym, though we now use it when talking aboutreading difficulthandwriting.
 
SIGN comes from the Latin noun signum, "mark or sign." A signal is a kind of  sign. Your signature is your own personal sign. And an architect 's design marks out the pat tern for a building.
 
signify              (1) To be a sign of something; to mean something. (2) To show or make known, especially by a sign.


E.g.
 The improved performance of the st udent s signifies that the new approach may be working.


Signify basically means "to make a sign or signal." One of it s synonyms is indicate; the index finger is the finger you point with, so to indicate is essentially to point to something. Significant means "important " and significance means "importance"; similarly, insignificant means "unimportant " and insignificance means "lack of importance."
 
insignia A badge of authority or honor; a distinguishing sign or mark.


E.g.
 Peering closely at the phot ograph, he could now see clearly the insignia of the Nazi SS on his grandfather's chest .


Insignia are the official signs of rank, tit les, or awards. Medals are an example, as are the crowns of monarchs. The Catholic church employs such insignia as the red robes of cardinals.
U.S. president s have the presidential seal, which appears on the stand when they're giving a speech. But most of us think first of the bars, stripes, badges, and patches of military rank.
 
signat ory                   A person or government that signs an agreement with others; especially a government thatagrees with others to abide by a signed agreement .


E.g.
 More than a dozen countries were signat ories to the agreement set ting limit s on fishing in international waters.


A signat ory put s his or her signature on a document thatis also signed by others. In 1215 the English barons revolted against King John and forced him to join them as a signat ory to the Magna Carta. This agreement stated the barons' own duties to the King butalso assigned the barons clear right s and limited the King's power over them. Though the Magna Carta did nothing for the common people, it 's often been called the first step t oward democracy in the English-speaking countries.
 
signet                      (1) A seal used instead of a signature to give personal or official authority to a document . (2) A small engraved seal, often in the form of a ring.


E.g.
 The charters of lands and right s of the early American colonies were confirmed with the king's signet .


Signet s have been used for thousands of years. The design of a signetis personalized for it s owner, and no two are alike. The ancient s used signet s to mark their possessions and to sign contract s. In later years signet s were used to stamp a blob of hot wax sealing a folded secret document so thatit couldn't be opened and read without the design being broken. The Pope still wears a signet , called the Fisherman's Ring, which is carved with a figure of St . Peter encircled with the Pope's name; after a Pope's death, the ring is destroyed and a new one is made.
 

 
Number Words

QUADR/QUART comes from Latin words meaning "four" or "fourth." In English, a quartis one- fourth of a gallon, justas a quarter is one-fourth of a dollar. A quadrangle has four sides and angles butisn't necessarily square. And quadruplets are four babies born at the same time.
 
quadrant                     (1) A quarter of a circle. (2) Any of the four quarters into which something is divided by two lines intersecting atrightangles.


E.g.
 Washingt on, D.C., like a number of other cities, is divided into quadrant s called Northwest , Northeast , Southwest , and Southeast .


This  word  is  used  for a  traditional instrument , used to make  calculations  of  altit ude  and traditionally employed by sailors to navigate, which has a piece shaped like a quarter of a circle. A quadrant shower is a shower that fit s snugly into a bathroom corner and displays a curved front , making a quadrant shape on the floor. But perhaps quadrantis used most often t oday to name a particular quarter of a city.
 
quadrille                      A square dance popular in the 18th and 19th century, made up of five or six pat terns for four couples.


E.g.
 Quadrilles were very popular at balls in the American South before the Civil War.


The quadrille, named for it s four couples that form the sides of a square, seems to have begun as a French country dance. In the 18th century it became fashionable among the French nobility; as performed by elegant ly dressed arist ocrat s, it became slow and formal. It crossed over to England and from there to New England, where it turned back into a dance for the common people. It soon evolved into the American square dance, a lively type of dance thatemploys a "caller" to make sure everyone remembers the steps.
 
quadriplegic
    Paralyzed in both arms and both legs.


E.g.
 A mot orcycle accidentin her teens had killed her boyfriend and lefther a quadriplegic.


Quadriplegia is the result of injury or illness, almostalways affecting the spine. Though a paraplegic has lost the use only of his or her legs, quadriplegics are paralyzed in all four limbs. Today voice-activated wheelchairs help the quadriplegic getaround, and houses can be equipped with similar systems to operate light s and appliances; monkeys have even been trained to assist quadriplegics with everyday tasks. The work  of  the  quadriplegic  act or Christ opher Reeve has led to remarkable advances in developing new nerve connections, enabling some determined paraplegics and quadriplegics to walk again.
 
quartile              One of four equal groups each containing a quarter of  a statistical population.


E.g.
 The schools in our t own always average in the lowest quartile in both reading and math achievement .


A quartile is a quarter of a specific group thathas been tested or evaluated in specific ways. The first quartile is the one that scores highestand the fourth quartile scores lowest . For achievementand proficiency test s, the first quartile is the place to be; for blood pressure or cholesterol, the third quartile is healthier.
 
TETR comes from the Greek word for "four." In the immensely popular video game Tetris, for example, each of the pieces the game is played with has four segment s. But the root usually shows up in long chemical names.
 
tetracycline
A yellow broad-spectrum antibiotic.


E.g.
 He was senthome with a prescription for tetracycline and some advice abouthow to avoid Lyme disease in the future.


Most  chemical names are made up of two or more Greek and Latin root s strung t ogether. Thus, tetracycline, with it s cycl- root  from the Greek word for "circle," means "four-ringed"- thatis, "consisting of four fused hydrocarbon rings." Antibiotics work against  bacteria and other tiny organisms (but not viruses); tetracycline, which comes from a kind of soil bacteria, is one of the most used of the antibiotics. "Broad-spectrum" antibiotics work well on numerous organisms; thus, tetracycline has proved effective againstacne, chlamydia, cholera, ricket s, and various lung and eye infections, among many other conditions.
 
tetrahedron
  A solid shape formed by four flat faces.


E.g.
 Her son's box kites was a tetrahedron, and it s pyramid shape was easy to pick outamong the traditional designs flown by the other children.


The simplest tetrahedron is made of four equal-sided triangles: one is used as the base, and the other three are fit ted to itand each other to make a pyramid. But the great pyramids of Egyptaren't tetrahedrons: they instead have a square base and four triangular faces, and thus are five-sided rather than four-sided.
 
tetralogy
A set of four connected literary, artistic, or musical works.


E.g.
 The Raj Quartet, Paul Scot t 's long and complex tetralogy of India, was made into a highly praised television series.


Vivaldi's Four Seasons could be called a tetralogy, since it 's a set of four violin concert os, one for each season of the year. Eight of Shakespeare's hist ory plays are often grouped into two tetralogies. Wagner's greatring of  the  Nibelung,  an  opera  tetralogy  based  on  Norse mythology, contains about 18 hours of music. The original tetralogies, however, were set s of four plays by the same author performed t ogether in ancient Greece; the first three were always tragedies, and the last was a wild comedy. Tetralogies were writ ten by such great dramatist s as Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripedes; unfort unately, none of them have survived in their entirety.
 
tetrapod
A vertebrate with two pairs of limbs.


E.g.
 His special st udy was the great seismosaurus, probably the largest tetrapod-and the largest land animal-thatever lived.


The earliest tetrapods, or "four-footed" animals, were mammal-like reptiles thatevolved before the rise of the dinosaurs and ranged from mouse-sized to cow-sized. Today the tetrapods include the reptiles, the amphibians, the birds, and the mammals-including humans. Though the fish aren't classified as tetrapods, it 's quite possible that our own limbs began as paired fins hundreds of millions of years ago.
 

 

 
