 2


MANIA PSYCH CEPT FIN JECT TRACT DUC/DUCT SEQU WordsfromMythology
Quiz2-1 Quiz2-2 Quiz2-3 Quiz2-4 Quiz2-5 ReviewQuizzes2

MANIA in Latin means "madness," and the meaning passed over into English unchanged. Our word mania can mean a mental illness, or at  least  an excessive enthusiasm. We might  call someone a maniac who was wild, violent , and mentally ill-or maybe justreally enthusiastic about something. Too  much caffeine  might make  you a  bit manic. But the intense mood swings once known as manic-depressive illness  are  now  usually  called bipolar  disorder instead.
 
klept omania
        A mental illness in which a person has a strong desire to steal things.


E.g.
 Klept omania leads it s sufferers to steal items of lit t le value that they don't need anyway.


Klepto- comes from the Greek word kleptein, "to steal." Even though klept omania is often the but t of jokes, it 's actually a  serious mental illness, often  associated  with mood  disorders, anxiety disorders, eating disorders, and substance abuse. Klepot omaniacs tend to be depressed, and many live lives of secret shame because they're afraid to seek treat ment .
 
dipsomaniac
       A person with an extreme and uncontrollable desire for alcohol.


E.g.
 She didn't like the word alcoholic being applied to her, and liked dipsomaniac even less.


Dipsomaniac comes from the Greek noun dipsa, "thirst ," but thirst usually has nothing to do with it . Some expert s distinguish bet ween an alcoholic and a dipsomaniac, reserving dipsomaniac for someone involved in frequentepisodes of binge drinking and blackout s. In any case, there are plenty of less respect ful words for a person of similar habit s: sot, lush, wino, souse, boozer, guzzler, tippler, tosspot, drunkard, boozehound--the list goes on and on and on.
 
megalomaniac
    A mental disorder marked by feelings of great personal power and importance.


E.g.
 When the governor started calling for arming his National Guard with nuclear weapons, the voters finally realized they had elected a megalomaniac.


Since the Greek root megalo- means "large," someone who is megalomaniacal has a mental disorder marked by feelings of personal grandeur. Megalomania has probably afflicted many rulers throughouthist ory: The Roman emperor Caligula insisted thathe be worshipped as a living god. Joseph Stalin suffered from the paranoia that often accompanies megalomania, and had thousands of his countrymen executed as a result . J.-B. Bokassa, dictat or of a small and extremely poor African nation, proclaimed himself emperor of the country he renamed the Central African Empire. And even democratically elected leaders have often acquired huge egos as a result of public acclaim. But megalomaniac is generally thrown around as an insultand rarely refers to real mental illness.
 
egomaniac
Someone who is extremely self-centered and ignores the problems and concerns of others.


E.g.
 He's a completely unimpressive person, but that doesn't keep him from being an egomaniac.


Ego is Latin for "I," and in English ego usually means "sense of self-worth." Most people's egos stay ata healthy level, but some become exaggerated. Egomaniacs may display a grandiose sense of self-importance, with fantasies about their own brilliance or beauty, intense envy of others, a lack of sympathy, and a need to be adored or feared. But , like megalomaniac, the word egomaniac is thrown around by lot s of people who don't mean much more by it than blowhard or know-it-all.
 
PSYCH comes from the Greek word psyche, meaning "breath, life, soul." Psychology is the science of mind and behavior, and a psychologist treat s or st udies the mental problems of individuals and groups. Psychiatry is a branch of medicine that deals with mental and emotional disorders, and a psychiatrist (like any other doct or) may prescribe drugs to treat them.
 
psyche                Soul, personality, mind.


E.g.
 Analyst s are constant ly trying to understand the nation's psyche and why the U.S. often behaves so different ly from other countries.


Sometime back in the 16th century, we borrowed the word psyche direct ly from Greek into English. In Greek mythology, Psyche was a beautiful princess who fell in love with Eros (Cupid), god of love, and went through terrible trials before being allowed to marry him. The st ory is often underst ood to be about the soul redeeming it self through love. (To the Greeks, psyche also meant "but terfly," which suggest s how they imagined the soul.) In English, psyche often sounds less spiritual than soul, less intellectual than mind, and more private than personality.
 
psychedelic                   (1) Of  or relating to a  drug  (such  as  LSD) that  produces abnormal and often extreme mental effect s such as hallucinations. (2) Imitating the effect s of psychedelic drugs.


E.g.
 In her only psychedelic experience, back in 1970, she had watched with horror as the walls began crawling with bizarrely colored creatures.


The most famous-or not orious-of the psychedelic drugs is LSD, a compound that can be obtained from various mushrooms and other fungi butis usually created in the lab. The other well-known psychedelics are psilocybin (likewise obtained from fungi) and mescaline (obtained from peyote cact us). How psychedelics produce their effect s is still fairly mysterious, part ly because research ceased for almost 20 years because of their reputation, but scientist s are determined to find the answers and much research is now under way. Psychedelics are now used to treatanxiety in patient s with cancer, and are being tested in the treat ment of such serious conditions as severe depression, alcoholism, and drug addiction.
 
psychosomatic
   Caused by mental or emotional problems rather than by physical illness.


E.g.
 Her doct or assumed her st omach problems were psychosomatic but gave her some harmless medication anyway.


Since the Greek word soma means "body," psychosomatic suggest s the link bet ween mind and body. Since one's mental state may have an importanteffect on one's physical state, research on new medicines always involves giving some patient s in the experimenta placebo (fake medicine), and some who receive the sugar pills will seem to improve. You may hear someone say of someone else's sympt oms, "Oh, it 's probably just  psychosomatic," implying that the physical pain or illness is imaginary-maybe justan at tempt to get sympathy-and that the person could will itaway if he or she wanted t o. But this can be harsh and unfair, since, whatever the cause is, the pain is usually real.
 
psychotherapist
   One who treat s mental or emotional disorder or related bodily ills by psychological means.


E.g.
 He's get ting medication from a psychiatrist , but  it 's his sessions with the psychotherapist thathe really values.


Many psychologist s offer psychological counseling, and psychological counseling can usually be called psychotherapy, so many psychologist s can be called psychotherapist s. The mostintense form of psychotherapy, called psychoanalysis, usually requires several visit s a week. A competing type of therapy known as behavior therapy focuses on changing a person's behavior (often some individual habit such as st ut tering, tics, or phobias) without looking very deeply into his or her mental state.
 

 
CEPT comes from the Latin verb meaning "take, seize." Capture, which is whata captor has done to a captive, has the same meaning. Captivate once meant literally "capture," but now means only to capture mentally through charm or appeal. Butin some other English words this root produces, such as those below, it s meaning is harder to find.
 
reception                    (1) The act of receiving. (2) A social gathering where guest s are formally welcomed.


E.g.
 Although the reception of her plan by the board of direct ors was enthusiastic, it was months before anything was done aboutit .


Reception is the noun form of receive. So ata formal reception, guest s are received or welcomed or "taken in." A bad TV reception means the signal isn't being received well. When a new novel receives good reviews, we say ithas met with a good critical reception. If it get s a poor reception, on the other hand, that 's the same as saying thatit wasn't well-received.
 
intercept
  To st op, seize, or interrupt (something or someone) before arrival.


E.g.
 The explosives had been intercepted by police just before being loaded onto the jet .


Since the prefix inter means "bet ween" (see INTER), it 's nothard to see how intercept was created. Arms shipment s coming to a country are sometimes intercepted, but such interceptions can sometimes be underst ood as act s of war. In foot ball, soccer, and basket ball, players try to intercept the ball as it 's being passed by the other team. In years gone by, let ters and document s being carried bet ween officers or officials were sometimes intercepted when the carrier was  caught ;  t oday, when  these  communications  are  generally  electronic, an intercepted e-mail isn'tactually st opped, but simply read secret ly by a third party.
 
perceptible
  Noticeable or able to be felt by the senses.


E.g.
 Her change in at tit ude t oward him was barely perceptible, and he couldn't be sure he wasn't justimagining it .


Perceptible includes the prefix per-, meaning "through," so the word refers to whatever can be taken in through the senses. A perceptive person picks up minor changes, small clues, or hint s and shades of meaning that others can't perceive, so one person's perception-a tiny sound, a slightchange in the weather, a different t one of voice-often won't be perceptible to another.
 
susceptible
(1)  Open to some  influence; responsive. (2) Able to be submit ted to an action or process.


E.g.
 She impressed everyone immediately with her intelligence, so they're now highly susceptible to her influence and usually go along with anything she proposes.


With it s prefix sus-, "up," susceptible refers to something or someone that "takes up" or absorbs like a sponge. A sickly child may be susceptible to colds, and an unlucky adult may be susceptible to back problems. A lonely elderly person may be susceptible to whata con man tells him or her on the phone. And st udent s are usually susceptible to the teaching of an imaginative professor-thatis, likely to enjoy and learn from it .
 
FIN comes from the Latin word for "end" or "boundary." Final describes last things, and a finale or a finish is an ending. (And at the end of a French film, you may just see the word "Fin.") Butit s meaning is harder to trace in some of the other English words derived from it .
 
confine                     (1) To keep (someone or something) within limit s. (2) To hold (someone) in a location.


E.g.
 He had heard the bad news from the CEO, but when he spoke to his employees he confined his remarks to a few hint s that sales had slipped.


Confine means basically to keep someone or something within borders. Someone confined to a bedroom or a wheelchair is t oo ill or disabled to be anywhere else. A person under "house arrest " is confined to his or her house by the government . Ata business meeting, the discussion may be confined to a single t opic. A t own may keep industrial development confined to one area by means of zoning. And someone confined to the state prison for 20 years has probably commit ted quite a serious crime.
 
definitive                           (1) Authoritative and final. (2) Specifying perfect ly or precisely.


E.g.
 The team's brilliantresearch provided a definitive description of the virus and it s strange mutation pat terns.


Something definitive is complete and final. A definitive example is the perfectexample. A definitive answer is usually a strong yes or no. A definitive biography contains everything we'll ever need to know about someone. Ella Fit zgerald's famous 1950s recordings of American songs have even been called definitive-but no one ever wanted them to be the last .
 
finite                Having definite limit s.


E.g.
 Her ambitions were infinite, buther wealth was finite.


Ithas  come  as  a  shock to many  of  us to realize  that  resources  such  as  oil-and  the at mosphere's ability to absorb greenhouse gases-are finite rather than unlimited. The debate continues as to whether the universe is finite or infinite and, if it 's finite, how to think about what lies beyond it . Religion has always concerned it self with the question of the finite (thatis, human life on earth) versus the infinite (God, eternity, and infinity). But finite is most ly used in scientific writing, often with the meaning "definitely measurable."
 
infinitesimal
          Extremely or immeasurably small.


E.g.
 Looking more closely at the research data, he now saw an odd pat tern of changes so infinitesimal that they hadn't been noticed before.


Justas infinite describes something immeasurable ("without limit "), infinitesimal describes something endlessly small. When Ant onie van Leeuwenhoek invented the microscope in the 17th century, he was able to see organisms thathad been thought t oo infinitesimally small to exist . But t oday's electron microscope allows us to see infinitesimal aspect s of mat ter thateven Leeuwenhoek could nothave imagined.
 

 
JECT comes from jacere, the Latin verb meaning "throw" or "hurl." To reject something is to throw (or push) it back; to eject something is to throw (or drive) it out ; and to inject something is to throw (or squirt ) itinto something else.
 
interject
To interrupta conversation with a comment or remark.


E.g.
 His anger was growing as he listened to the conversation, and every so often he would interjecta crude comment .


According to it s Latin root s, interject ought to mean literally "throw bet ween." For most of the word's hist ory, however, the only things thathave been interjected have been comment s dropped suddenly into a conversation. Interjections are often humorous, and sometimes even insulting, and the bestinterjections are so quick that the conversation isn'teven interrupted.
 
conjecture
     To guess.


E.g.
 He was lastheard of in Bogot, and they conjectured thathe had methis end in the Andes at the hands of the guerrillas.


Formed with the prefix con-, "t ogether," conjecture means literally "to throw t ogether"-thatis, to produce a theory by put ting t ogether a number of  fact s. So, for  example, Columbus conjectured from his calculations thathe would reach Asia if he sailed west ward, and his later conjecture that there was a "Northwest Passage" by sea from the At lantic to the Pacific over the North American continent was proved correct centuries later.
 
projection
    An estimate of what mighthappen in the future based on whatis happening now.

E.g.
 The presidenthas been hearing different deficit projections all week from the members of his economic team.

Projection has various meanings, but what they all have in common is that something is sent out or forward. A movie is projected onto a screen; a skilled actress project s her voice outinto a large theater without seeming to shout ; and something sticking out from a wall can be called a projection. But the meaning we focus on here is the one used by businesses and government s. Most projections of this kind are estimates of a company's sales or profit s-or of the finances of a t own, state, or country-sometime in the future.
 
traject ory                       The curved path thatan object makes in space, or thata thrown object follows as itrises and falls to earth.

E.g.
 Considering the likely range, traject ory, and accuracy of a bullet fired from a cheap handgun at 100 yards, the murder seemed incredible.

Formed with part  of the prefix trans-, "across," trajectory means a "hurling  across."  By calculating the effect of gravity and other forces, the traject ory of an object launched into space ata known speed can be computed precisely. Missiles stand a chance of hit ting their target only if their traject ory has been plot ted accurately. The word is used most often in physics and engineering, but notalways; we can also say, for example, that the traject ory of a whole life may be setin a person's youth, or thata new book traces the long traject ory of the French empire.
 
TRACT comes from trahere, the Latin verb meaning "drag or draw." Something attractive draws us t oward it . Something distracting pulls your at tention away. And when you extract something from behind the sofa, you drag it out .
 
traction                         The  friction  that  allows a  moving  thing to move  over a  surface without slipping.

E.g.
 The spinning wheels were get ting no traction on the ice, and we began to slip backward down the hill.


A tractor is something that pulls something else. We usually use the word for a piece of farm machinery, butit 's also the name of the part of a big truck thatincludes the engine and the cab. Tract ors get terrific traction, because of their powerful engines and the deep ridges on their huge wheels. A cross-country skier needs traction to kick herself forward, but doesn't wantit to slow her down when she's gliding, so the bot t om of the skis may have a "fish-scale" surface that permit s both of these at the same time.
 
retract             (1) To  pull back  (something) into  something  larger. (2) To  take  back (something said or writ ten).


E.g.
 She was forced to retracther commentabouther opponentafter it was condemned in the press.


The prefix re- ("back") gives retract the meaning of "draw back." Justas a catretract s it s claws into it s paws when they aren't being used, a public figure may issue a retraction in order to say thathe or she no longer want s to say something thathas just been said. Butit 's sometimes hard to know whata retraction means: Was the original statementan error or an outright lieE.g.
 Sometimes a politician even has to retract something thateveryone actually assumes is the truth. Thousands of citizens were forced to publicly retract their "wrong" ideas by the Soviet governmentin the 1930s and the Chinese governmentin the 1960s. Someone wrongly accused may demand a retraction from his accuser-though t oday it seems more likely thathe'll just go ahead and sue.
 
protracted
    Drawn out , continued, or extended.


E.g.
 No one was looking forward to a protracted struggle for cust ody of the baby.


With  it s  prefix pro-, "forward," protracted usually applies to something drawn out  forward in time. A protracted strike may cripple a company; a protracted rainy spell may rot the root s of vegetables; and a protracted lawsuit occasionally out lives the parties involved. Before the invention of the polio vaccines, polio's many victims had no choice but to suffer a protracted illness and it s aftereffect s.
 
intractable
Noteasily handled, led, taught , or controlled.


E.g.
 Corruption in the army was the country's intractable problem, and for many years all foreign aid had ended up in the colonels' pocket s.


Intractable simply means "untreatable," and even comes from the same root . The word may describe both people and conditions. A cancer patient may suffer intractable pain that doct ors are unable to treat . An intractable alcoholic goes back to the bot t le immediately after "drying out ." Homelessness, though ithardly existed thirty years ago, is now sometimes regarded as an intractable problem.
 

 
DUC/DUCT, from the Latin verb ducere, "to lead," shows up regularly in English. Duke means basically "leader." The Italian dictat or Mussolini was known simply as Il Duce, "the leader." But such words as produce and reduce also contain the root , even though their meanings show it less clearly.
 
conducive
 Tending to promote, encourage, or assist ; helpful.


E.g.
 She found the at mosphere in the quiet caf¨¦ conducive to st udy and even to creative thinking.


Something conducive "leads t o" a desirable result . A cozy living room may be conducive to relaxed conversation, justas a boardroom may be conducive to more intense discussions. Particular tax policies are often conducive to savings and invest ment , whereas others are conducive to consumer spending. Notice that conducive is almostalways followed by to.
 
deduction
      (1) Subtraction. (2) The reaching of a conclusion by reasoning.


E.g.
 Foretelling the future by deduction based on a political or economic theory has proved to be extremely difficult .


To deductis simply to subtract . A tax deduction is a subtraction from your taxable income allowed by the government for certain expenses, which will resultin your paying lower taxes. Your insurance deductible is the amount of a medical bill that the insurance company makes you subtract before it start s to pay-in other words, the amount that will come out of your own pocket . But deduction also means "reasoning," and particularly reasoning based on general principles to produce specific findings. Mathematical reasoning is almostalways deduction, for instance, since itis based on general rules. But when Dr. Wat son exclaims "Brilliant deduction, my dear Holmes!" he simply means "brilliantreasoning," since Sherlock Holmes's solutions are based on specific details he has noticed rather than on general principles.
 
induce                   (1) Persuade, influence. (2) Bring about .


E.g.
 To induce him to make the call we had to promise we wouldn't do itagain.


Inducing is usually gent le persuasion; you may, for instance, induce a friend to go to a concert , or induce a child to st op crying. An inducementis something that  might  lure  you to do something, though inducement s are occasionally a bit menacing, like the Godfather's offer thatyou can'trefuse. Induce also sometimes means "produce"; thus, doct ors mustat times induce labor in a pregnant woman. Notice thatinductand induction are somewhat different from induce and inducement, though they come from the identical root s.
 
seduction
      (1)  Temptation to sin,  especially   temptation to sexual intercourse. (2) At traction or charm.


E.g.
 The company began it s campaign of seduction of the smaller firm by inviting it s t op management to a series of weekends atexpensive resort s.


Seduction, with it s prefix se-, "aside," means basically "lead aside or astray." In Hawthorne's novel The Scarlet Letter, Hester Prynne is forced to wear a large scarleta, for "adulteress," after it  is revealed that  she's been seduced by the Reverend Dimmesdale. Seduction also takes less physical forms. Advertisement s constant ly try to seduce us (often using sex as a temptation) into buying product s we hadn'teven known existed.
 
SEQU comes from the Latin verb sequi, meaning  "to  follow." A sequel follows the original novel, film, or television show.
 
sequential
     (1) Arranged in order or in a series. (2) Following in a series.


E.g.
 In writing the hist ory of the revolution, his challenge was to putall the event s of those fateful days in proper sequential order.


Things in sequence, or regular order, are arranged sequentially. Most novels and films move sequentially, but some use techniques such as flashbacks thatinterrupt the movement forward in time. Sequential courses in college must follow each other in the proper order, just like sequential tasks or steps.
 
subsequent
      Following in time, order, or place; later.


E.g.
 Through all her subsequent love affairs, she never st opped thinking about the man who gotaway.


The prefix sub- normally means "below," and the sub- in subsequent seems to imply thateverything after the firstis somehow inferior. As the definition states, subsequent can refer to time ("All our subsequentat tempt s to contacther failed"), order ("The subsequenthouses on the list looked even worse"), or place ("The subsequent villages on the river heading east become steadily  more  primitive"). But subsequently, as in "I subsequent ly learned the real st ory," simply means "later."
 
consequential
           (1) Resulting. (2) Important .


E.g.
 None of our discussions thus far has been very consequential; next week's meeting will be the important one.


Something consequential follows or comes along with something else. The "resulting" meaning of consequential is usually seen in legal writing. For example, "consequential losses" are losses that supposedly resulted from some improper behavior, about which the lawyer's clientis suing. But normally consequential means "significant " or "important ," and it 's especially used for event s that will produce large consequences, or result s.
 
non sequitur                          A statement that does not follow logically from anything previously said.


E.g.
 Rat t led by the question, his mind went blank, and he blurted outa non sequitur that fetched a few laughs from members of the audience.


Non sequitur is actually a complete sentence in Latin, meaning "It does not follow"-thatis, something said or writ ten doesn't logically follow what came before it . It was Arist ot le who identified the non sequitur as one of the basic fallacies of logic-thatis, one of the ways in which a person's reasoning may go wrong. For Arist ot le, the non sequitur is usually a conclusion that doesn'tactually result from the reasoning and evidence presented. Sometime when you're listening to politicians answering questions, see how many non sequiturs you can spot .
 

 
Words from Mythology

Apollonian
  Harmonious, ordered, rational, calm.


E.g.
 After a century of Romantic emotion, some composers adopted a more Apollonian style, producing clearly pat terned pieces thatavoided extremes of all kinds.


In Greek mythology, Apollo was the god of the sun, light , prophecy, and music, and the mostrevered of all the gods. Part ly because of the writings of Niet zsche, we now often think of Apollo (in contrast to the god Dionysus) as a model of calm reason, and we may call anything with those qualities Apollonian. This isn't  the whole st ory aboutapollo, however; he had a terrible temper and could be viciously cruel when he felt like it .
 
bacchanalian
  Frenzied, orgiastic.


E.g.
 The bacchanalian partying on graduation nightresulted in three wrecked cars, two lawsuit s by unamused parent s, and more new experiences than most of the participant s could remember the next day.


The Roman god of drama, wine, and ecstasy, Bacchus was the focus of a widespread celebration, the Bacchanalia. The festivities were originally secret , and only initiated members could participate. There was wine in abundance, and participant s were expected to cut loose from normal restraint s and give in to all sort s of wild desires. Eventually the Bacchanalia became more public and uncontrolled, finally get ting so out of hand thatin 186 B.C. the Roman authorities had it banned. Much the same bacchanalian spirit fills tropical carnivals every year, including New Orleans' Mardi Gras.
 
delphic                   Unclear, ambiguous, or confusing.


E.g.
 All she could get from the strange old woman were a few delphic comment s that lefther more confused than ever about the missing document s.


Delphi in Greece was the site of a temple to Apollo at which there resided an oracle, a woman through whom Apollo would speak, foretelling the future. The Greeks consulted the oracle frequent ly on mat ters both private and public. The prophecies were given in difficult  poetry thathad to be interpreted by priest s, and even the interpretations  could  be  hard to understand. When Croesus, king of Lydia, asked what would happen if he at tacked the Persians, the oracle announced thathe would destroy a greatempire; what she didn't say was that the empire destroyed would be his own. Modern-day descendant s of the oracle include some political commentat ors, who ut ter words of delphic complexity every week.
 
Dionysian
  Frenzied, delirious.


E.g.
 Only in the tropics did such festivals become truly Dionysian, he said, which was why he was booking his flight to Rio.


Dionysus was the Greek forerunner of Bacchus. He was the invent or of wine, which he gave to the human race. For that giftand for all the wild behavior thatit led t o, Dionysus became immensely popular, and he appears in a great many myths. He is often shown holding a wine goblet , with his hair full of vine leaves, and at tended by a band of goat -footed satyrs and wild female spirit s called maenads. In the 19th century, scholars such as Niet zsche claimed that the ancient world could be underst ood as a continuing conflict bet ween the at tit udes represented by Apollo (see Apollonian) and Dionysus-thatis, bet ween order and disorder, bet ween moderation and excess, bet ween the controlled and the ecstatic.
 
jovial                     Jolly, good-natured.


E.g.
 Their grandfather was as jovial and sociable as their grandmother was quietand withdrawn.


Jove, or Jupiter, was the Roman counterpart of the Greek's Zeus, and like Zeus was regarded as chief among the gods. When the Romans were naming the planet s, they gave the name Jupiter to the one that , as they may have already known, was the largest of all (though only the second-brightest to the naked eye). When the practice of astrology reached the Roman empire from the East , astrologers declared that those "born under Jupiter" were destined to be merry and generous, and many centuries later this would resultin the words jovial and joviality.
 
mercurial
Having rapid and unpredictable changes of mood.


E.g.
 His mother's always mercurial temper became even more unpredictable, to the point where the slightest thing would trigger a violent fit .


The god Mercury, with his winged cap and sandals, was the very symbol of speed, and the planet Mercury was named for him by the Romans because itis the fastest -moving of the planet s. His name was also given to the liquid silver metal that skit ters around on a surface so quickly and unpredictably. And the word mercurial seems to have come from the metal, rather than direct ly from the god (or an astrologer's view of the planet 's influence). Mercurial people are usually bright butimpulsive and changeable (and sometimes a bit unstable).
 
Olympian
   Lofty, superior, and detached.


E.g.
 Now 77, he moved slowly and spoke to the younger lawyers in Olympian t ones, buthis college friends could remember when he was a brash, crazy risk-taker.


The Greek gods lived high at op Mt . Olympus, which allowed them to watch what went on in the human realm below and intervene as they saw fit . They insisted on being properly worshipped by humans, but otherwise tended to treat the affairs of these weak and short - lived creatures almost like a sport . So Olympian describes someone who seems "lofty" and "above itall," as if surveying a scene in which other people appear the size of ant s. The Olympic Games were first celebrated in the 8th century B.C., at the religious site called Olympia (far from Mt . Olympus), and Olympian t oday actually most often refers to Olympic athletes.
 
venereal
Having to do with sexual intercourse or diseases transmit ted by it .


E.g.
 In the 19th century syphilis especially was often fatal, and venereal diseases killed some of the greatest figures of the time.


Venus was the Roman goddess of love, the equivalent of the Greek Aphrodite. Since she governed all aspect s of love and desire, a word derived from her name was given to the diseases acquired through sexual contact . Most of these venereal diseases have been around for many centuries, but only in the 20th century did doct ors devise test s to identify them or medicines to cure them. Today the official term is sexually transmitted disease, or STD; buteven this name turns out to be ambiguous, since some of these diseases can be contracted in other ways as well.
 

 

 
