 25


VERB SIMIL/SIMUL SCEND ONYM SCRIB/SCRIP FALL SOLU HYDR GreekandLatin
Borrowings
Quiz25-1 Quiz25-2 Quiz25-3 Quiz25-4 Quiz25-5 ReviewQuizzes25

VERB comes from the Latin verbum, meaning "word." A verb-or action word-appears in some form in every complete sentence. To express something verbally-or to verbalize something-is to say it or write it .
 
verbose                       Using more words than are needed; wordy.


E.g.
 The writing style in government publications has often been both dry and verbose-a deadly combination.


Americans brought up on fast -paced TV shows and action films have lostany patience they once had for verbosity. So mostamerican writing is brisk, and American speakers usually don't waste many words. But many of us love our own voices and opinions and don'trealize we're being verbose until our listeners start stifling their yawns. And st udent s still try to fill up the pages of their term papers with unneeded verbosity.
 
proverb              A brief, often-repeated statement thatexpresses a general truth or common observation.


E.g.
 "Waste not , want not " used to be a favorite proverb in many households.


Proverbs probably appeared with the dawn of language. Sayings such as "A stitch in time saves nine," or "Pride goeth before a fall," or "Least said, soonest mended," or "To everything there is a season" are easily memorized nugget s of wisdom. But the convenient thing about proverbs is that there's often one for every point of view. For every "Look before you leap" there's a "He who hesitates is lost ." "A fool and his money are soon parted" can be countered with "To make money you have to spend money." A cynic once observed, "Proverbs are invaluable treasures to dunces with good memories."
 
verbatim
  In the exact words; word for word.


E.g.
 It turned out that the writer had lifted long passages verbatim from an earlier, forgot ten biography of the statesman.


Verbatim comes direct ly from Latin into English with the same spelling and meaning. Memorizing famous speeches, poems, or literary passages is a good way to both train the memory and absorb the classic text s of our literature and culture. At one time the ability to recite verbatim the Get tysburg Address, the beginning of the Declaration of Independence, and great  speeches from Shakespeare was the mark of a well-educated person. But  when that language was quoted by a writer, he or she was always careful to put quotation marks around itand tell readers who the true author was.
 
verbiage                        An excess of words, often with lit t le content ; wordiness.


E.g.
 The agency's report was full of unnecessary verbiage, which someone should have edited out before the report was published.


Government  report s  are  not orious  for their unfort unate  tendency  t oward  empty  verbiage, through part of the reason is simply that officials are anxious to be following all the rules. Legal document s are also generally full of verbiage, part ly because lawyers want to be sure thatevery last possibility has been covered and no loopholes have been left . But writing that contains unneeded verbiage is often trying to disguise it s lack of real substance or clarity of thought . And every writer, including government workers and lawyers, should be constant ly on  the lookout for opport unities to hit the Delete key.
 
SIMIL/SIMUL come from the Latin adjective similis, meaning "like, resembling, similar," and the verb simulare, "to make like."  Two similar  things  resemble  each  other. Two simultaneous activities proceed at the same time. And a facsimile, such as you mightreceive from your fax machine, looks exact ly the same as the original.
 
simile        A  figure  of  speech, introduced  by as   or like, that  makes  a  point  of comparison bet ween two things differentin all other respect s.


E.g.
 He particularly liked the simile he'd thought of for the last line of the song's chorus, "It felt like a bulletin his heart ."


Fiction, poetry, and  philosophy  have  been  full of  similes  for  centuries. In  fact , the  oldest literature known to us uses similes, along with their close relatives known as metaphors (see metaphorical). This suggest s that similes are an essential part of imaginative writing in all times and all cultures. When Tennyson, describing an eagle, writes "And like a thunderbolthe falls," he's using a simile, since the line makes a specific comparison. "The road was a ribbon of moonlight " could be called a metaphor, though "The road was like a ribbon of moonlight " would be a simile.
 
assimilate                     (1) To  take  in  and  thoroughly  understand. (2) To  cause to become part of a different society or culture.


E.g.
 One of the traditional strengths of American society has been it s ability to assimilate one group of immigrant s after another.


Assimilate comes from the Latin verb assimulare, "to make similar," and it originally applied to the process by which food is taken into the body and absorbed into the system. In a similar way, a fact can be taken into the mind, thoroughly digested, and absorbed into one's st ore of knowledge. A newcomer to a job or a subject mustassimilate an often confusing mass of information; only after it 's been thoroughly absorbed can the person make intelligent use of it . An immigrant family assimilates into it s new culture by gradually adopting a new language and the habit s of their new neighbors-a process that 's always easier for the children than for the parent s.
 
simulacrum
     A copy, especially a superficial likeness or imitation.


E.g.
 As a boy he had filled his bedroom with model fighter jet s, and these simulacra had kepthis flying fantasies active for years.


In it s original meaning, a simulacrum is simply a representation of something else; so an original oil painting, marble stat ue, or plastic figurine could all be simulacra (notice the plural form) in the old sense. But t oday the word usually means a copy that 's meant to substit ute for the real thing-and usually a cheap and inferior copy, a pale imitation of the original. So in old Persia a beautifully laid out garden was a simulacrum of paradise. Some countries' government s are mere simulacra of democracy, since the people in power always steal the elections by miscounting the votes. And a bad act or might do a simulacrum of grief on the stage that doesn't convince anyone.
 
simulate
(1) To take on the appearance or effect of something, often in order to deceive. (2) To make a realistic imitation of something, such as a physical environment .


E.g.
 The armed services have made extensive use of video games to simulate the actual experience of warfare for their recruit s.


The zircon, that favorite of home shopping channels, simulates a diamond-more or less. A skilled furrier can dye lower-grade furs to simulate real mink. A skilled actress can simulate a range of emotions from absolute joy to crushing despair. And an apparat us that simulates the hazards of driving while int oxicated is likely to provide some very real benefit s.
 

 
SCEND  comes  from the  Latin  verb scandere, "to  climb."  The  staircase  we ascend to our bedroom at night we will descend the next morning, since what goes up must come down.
 
transcend                           To rise above the limit s of; overcome, surpass.


E.g.
 His defeatin the election had been terribly hard on him, and it t ook two years before he finally felthe had transcended the bit terness ithad produced.


Great leaders are expected to transcend the limitations of politics, especially during wartime and national  crises. A  great  writer  may  transcend  geographical  boundaries to become internationally respected. And certain laws of human nature seem to transcend hist orical periods and hold true for all times and all places.
 
condescend                       (1) To st oop to a level of lesser importance or dignity. (2) To behave as if superior.


E.g.
 Every so often my big brother would condescend to take me to a movie, but only when my parent s made him.


Back when society was more rigidly structured, condescend didn't sound so negative. People of higher rank, power, or social position had to overlook certain established rules of behavior if they wished to have social dealings with people of lower stat us, but such condescension was usually gracious and courteous. In t oday's more classless society, the term implies a manner that may be slight ly offensive. A poor relation is unlikely to be grateful to a wealthy and condescending relative who passes on her secondhand clothes, and employees atan office party may not be thrilled when the boss's wife condescends to mingle with them. Often the word is used rather unseriously, as when a friend comment s thata snooty sales clerk condescended to wait on her after ignoring her for several minutes.
 
descendant
   (1) One thathas come down from another or from a common st ock. (2) One deriving direct ly from a forerunner or original.


E.g.
 Though none of the great man's descendant s ever came close to achieving whathe had, most of them enjoyed very respectable careers.


Descendantis the opposite of ancestor. Your grandparent s' descendant s are those who are descended from them-your parent s, your brothers and sisters, and any children thatany of you may have. It 's been claimed thatevery person on earth is a descendant of Muhammad, and of every hist orical person before him-Julius Caesar, the Buddha, et c.-who started a line o f descent. (Some of us still find this hard to believe.) And notall descendant s are human; every modern thesaurus, for example, could be called the descendant of the one devised by Peter Mark Rogetin 1852.
 
ascendancy
Governing or controlling interest ; domination.


E.g.
 China's growing ascendancy over Tibet was capped by the invasion of 1950.


In the course of a year, the sun appears to pass through the t welve constellations of the zodiac in sequence, and all the planet s also lie close to the solar path. The constellation and planet thatare justrising, or ascendant, above the eastern horizon in the sun's path at the moment of a child's birth are said by astrologers to exercise a lifelong controlling influence over the child. This is the idea that lies at the heart of ascendancy, though the word t oday no longer hint s at supernatural powers.
 
ONYM comes from the Greek onyma, meaning "name, word." An anonymous donor or writer is one who isn't named. A synonym is a word with the same meaning as another word (see SYN). A nd homonyms (see HOM/HOMO) are words that look and sound alike butaren'tactually related, such as well ("healthy") and well ("a deep hole with water in it ").
 
ant onym
A word that means the opposite of some other word.


E.g.
 There's no pointin telling a three-year-old that catisn'tan ant onym of dog, and sun isn'tan ant onym of moon.


Antonym includes the Greek prefix ant-, meaning "opposite" (see ANT/ANTI). Ant onyms are often thought of in pairs: hot/cold, up/down, wet/dry, buy/sell, failure/success. Buta word may have more than one ant onym (old/young, old/new), especially when one of the words has synonyms (small/large, small/big, little/big), and a word may have many approximate ant onyms (adore/hate, adore/detest, adore/loathe). Butalthough lot s of words have synonyms, not so many have ant onyms. What would be the ant onym of pinkE.g.
 weatherE.g.
 semiproE.g.
 thirtyE.g.
 firefighterE.g.
 waxE.g.
 aboutE.g.
 considerE.g.

 
eponymous                        Of, relating t o, or being the person for whom something is named.


E.g.
 Adjectives such as Elizabethan, Victorian, and Edwardian show how the names of certain British monarchs have become eponymous for particular time periods and styles.


Things as differentas a bird, a river, and a drug may be named to honor someone. The Canadian city of Vancouver was named after the explorer George Vancouver; the diesel engine was named for it s invent or, Rudolph Diesel; Alzheimer's disease was named after the physician Alois Alzheimer; and so on. Common eponymous terms include Ohm's law, Parkinson's Law, and the Peter Principle. And if the Beat les' famous "white album" actually has a name, it 's usually called "The Beat les," which means thatit 's eponymous as well. Don't be surprised if eponymous turns out to be a hard word to use; lot s of other people have discovered the same thing.
 
patronymic
     Part of a personal name based on the name of one's father or one of his ancest ors.


E.g.
 Reading Tolst oy's vast novel, it can be helpful to know thathelene Vasilievna's second name is a patronymic, and thus thather father is named Vasili.


A patronymic, or patronym (see also PATER/PATR), is generally formed by adding a prefix or suffix to a name. Thus, a few centuries ago, the male patronymic of Patrick was Fit zpatrick ("Patrick's son"), that of Peter was Peterson or Petersen, that of Donald was MacDonald or McDonald, and that of Hernando was Hern¨¢ndez. Today, of course, each of these is an ordinary family name, or surname. In Russia, both a patronymic and a surname are still used; in the name Peter Ilyich Tchaikovsky, for example, Ilyich is a patronymic meaning "son of Ilya."
 
pseudonym                         A name that someone (such as a writer) uses instead of his or her real name.


E.g.
 Hundreds of Hardy Boys, Nancy Drew, and Bobbsey Twins novels were churned out under such pseudonyms as Franklin W. Dixon, Carolyn Keene, and Laura Lee Hope.


The Greek pseudo- is used in English to mean "false," or sometimes "resembling." A pseudonym is thus a false name, or alias. A writer's pseudonym is called a pen name, as in the case of Howard O'Brien (who usually writes as "Anne Rice" but sometimes  under  other names), and an act or's pseudonym is called a stage name, as in the case of Marion Morrison ("John Wayne"). A cadre name may be used for the sake of secrecy by a revolutionary plot ter such as Vladimir Ulyanov ("Lenin") or Iosif Dzhugashvili ("Stalin"). And in many religious orders, members adopt devotional names, as Agnes Bojaxhiu did in 1931 ("Teresa," later known as "Mother Teresa").
 

 
SCRIB/SCRIP comes from the Latin verb scribere, "to write." Scribble is an old word meaning to write or draw carelessly. A writ ten work thathasn't been published is a manuscript. And to describe is to picture something in words.
 
conscription
  Enforced enlist ment  of  persons, especially for military service; draft .


E.g.
 The first comprehensive system for nationwide conscription was instit uted by France for the Napoleonic wars that followed the French Revolution.


With it s scrip- root , conscription means basically writing someone's name on a list -a list that , unfort unately, a lot of people usually don't want to be on. Conscription has existed at least since ancient Egypt 's Old Kingdom (27th century B.C.), though universal conscription has been rare throughouthist ory. Forms of conscription were used by Prussia, Swit zerland, Russia, and other European powers in the 17th and 18th centuries. In the U.S., conscription was firstapplied during the Civil War, by both the North and the South. In the North there were pocket s of resistance, and the draft led to riot s in several cities. The U.S. abandoned conscription at the end of the war and didn'trevive it until World War I.
 
circumscribe
(1) To clearly limit the range or activity of something. (2) To draw a line around or to surround with a boundary.


E.g.
 Some children do best when their freedom is clearly circumscribed and their activities are supervised.


The prefix circum-, "around," is the key to circumscribe's basic meaning. Thus, we could say thata boxing ring is circumscribed by ropes, justas the area for an archaeological dig may be. A governor's power is always circumscribed by  a  state's  constit ution. And  a  physician's assistanthas a circumscribed role that doesn'tinclude writing prescriptions.
 
inscription
     (1)  Something  permanent ly  writ ten, engraved, or  printed, particularly on a building, coin, medal, or piece of currency. (2) The dedication of a book or work of art .


E.g.
 All U.S. coins bear the Latin inscription "E pluribus unum"-"From many, one."


With it s prefix in-, meaning "in" or "on," it 's not surprising thatan inscription is either writ ten on or engraved into a surface. Inscriptions in the ancient world were always chiseled into st one, as inscriptions still may be t oday. The principal monument of the Viet nam memorial in Washingt on, D.C., for instance, is a black wall on which are inscribed the names of all the Americans who died during the war-each name in full, row upon seemingly endless row. Butan inscription may also be a dedication, such as the words "For my wife" all by themselves on a page near the beginning of a book.
 
proscribe                         To forbid as harmful or unlawful; prohibit .


E.g.
 Despite thousands of laws proscribing lit tering, many of America's street s and public spaces continue to be dumping grounds.


The Latin prefix pro- sometimes meant "before," in the sense of "in front of" the people. So in ancientrome proscribere meant to make public in writing the name of a person who was about to be executed, and whose property would be seized by the state. But the meaning of the English word soon shifted to mean simply "prohibit " instead. Proscribe t oday is actually often the opposite of the very similar prescribe, which means basically "require."
 
FALL comes from the Latin verb fallere, "to deceive." It 's actually at the root of the word false, which we rarely use t oday to mean "deceptive," though that meaning does show up in older phrases: "Thou shalt not bear false wit ness against thy neighbor," for instance, or "A false- hearted lover will send you to your grave." Fallere is even at the root of fail and fault, though you might not guess it to look at them.
 
fallacy                      A wrong belief; a false or mistaken idea.


E.g.
 In her new article she exposes yetanother fallacy at the heart of these economic argument s.


Philosophers are constant ly using the word fallacy. For them, a fallacy is reasoning that comes to a conclusion without the evidence to supportit . This may have to do with pure logic, with the assumptions that the argumentis based on, or with the way words are used, especially if they don't keep exact ly the same meaning throughout the argument . There are many classic fallacies that occur again and again through the centuries and everywhere in the world. You may have heard of such fallacies as the "ad hominem" fallacy, the "question-begging" fallacy, the "straw man" fallacy, the "slippery slope" fallacy, the "gambler's" fallacy, or the "red herring" fallacy. Look them up and see if you've ever been guilty of any of them.
 
fallacious
Containing a mistake; not true or accurate.


E.g.
 Any policy that 's based on a lot of fallacious assumptions is going to be a bad one.


Fallacious is a formal and intellectual word. We rarely use itin casual speech; when we do, we risk sounding a bit full of ourselves and all-knowing. Butit 's used widely in writing, especially when one writer is arguing with another. And it 's used to describe both errors in factand errors in reasoning, including fallacies of the kind described in the previous entry.
 
fallibility
     Capability of making mistakes or being wrong.


E.g.
 Doct ors are concerned about the fallibility of these test s, which seem unable to detect the virus about 20% of the time.


You'll find this word showing up in discussions of eyewit ness testimony at crime scenes, of lie detect ors, and of critical airplane part s. Some of us are most familiar with the fallibility of memory, especially when we remember something clearly that turns out never to have happened. Being fallible is part of being human, and sometimes the biggesterrors are made by those who are thought of as the most brilliant of all.
 
infallible                       (1) Not capable of being wrong or making mistakes. (2) Certain to work properly or succeed.


E.g.
 Two college friends of mine claimed to have an infallible system for beating the odds atroulet te in Las Vegas.


Watch out when you hear aboutinfallible predictions, an infallible plan, an infallible cure, or even infallible lip gloss. Infallible isn'ta claim that scientist s, engineers, and doct ors like to make, so you're probably get ting bet ter information when the word not comes first . You may have heard the phrase "papal infallibility," which refers to the official position of the Roman Catholic church, adopted in the 19th century, that certain solemn statement s made by a Pope about faith or morals were not to be questioned. Popes since then have been careful not to make many of these statement s.
 

 
SOLU comes from the Latin verb solvere, "to loosen, free, release," and the root therefore may take the form solv- as well. So to solve a problem means to find it s solution, as if you were freeing up a logjam. And a solventis a chemical that dissolves or "loosens up" oil or paint .
 
soluble                   (1) Able to be dissolved in a liquid, especially water. (2) Able to be solved or explained.


E.g.
 To an optimistic young principal, the problems of a school like this one might seem challenging but soluble.


Soluble looks like a word that should be confined to chemistry labs, though it 's often used by nonchemist s as well to describe substances that can be dissolved in liquids. On the other hand, the sense of soluble meaning "solvable" is also quite common. In this sense, soluble, like it s opposite, insoluble, is usually paired with problem. If only all life's problems were soluble by stirring them in a container filled with water.
 
absolution
  The act of forgiving someone for their sins.


E.g.
 Every week she would kneel to confess her lit t le sins and receive absolution from the priest .


Since the Latin absolutus meant "set free," it 's easy to see how absolution came to mean "set free from sin." (And also easy to see why absolute means basically "pure"-thatis, originally, "free of sin.") The verb for absolution is absolve. Justas a priestabsolves believers of their sins, you may absolve your brother of blame for a household disaster, or you yourself may in time be absolved for that scrape on the car backing out of a parking space.
 
dissolution                     The act  or process of breaking down or apart  into basic component s, as through disruption or decay.


E.g.
 The dissolution of the U.S.S.R. was probably the most moment ous event of the last quarter of the 20th century.


Dissolution is the noun form of dissolve, butit 's a much less common word. Still, we refer to the fact that the dissolution of American marriages became far more common in the later 20th century. Or that when India won it s independence in 1948, the dissolution of the once-global British empire was all but complete. Or that  fact ors  such  as  crime  and  drugs  might  be contributing to the dissolution of contemporary society's moral fabric. A dissolute person is someone in whom all restrainthas dissolved, and who now indulges in behavior that shocks decent people.
 
resolute                         Marked by firm determination.


E.g.
 After ten years of indecision, the Senate finally seems resolute aboutreaching an agreement .


Resolute comes from the same Latin verb as resolved, and the two words are often synonyms. So how did it get this meaning from the LatinE.g.
 Essentially, when you resolve a question or problem, you come to a conclusion, and once you've reached a conclusion you can proceed to act . So in your New Year's resolutions, you resolve-or make up your mind-to do something. Unfort unately, New Year's resolutions aren'ta good illustration of the meaning of resolute, since only about one in ten actually seems to succeed.
 
HYDR flows from the Greek word for "water." The "water" root  can be found in the lovely flower called the hydrangea: it s seed capsules resemble ancient Greek water vessels.
 
hydraulic                     (1) Relating to water; operated, moved, or broughtabout by means of water. (2) Operated by the resistance or pressure of liquid forced through a small opening or t ube.


E.g.
 Withoutany hydraulic engineers, the country is unlikely to build many dams or reservoirs on it s own.


By means of a hydraulic lift , the driver can lift the bed of a dump truck with the t ouch of a but t on. He mightalso repair the hydraulic steering, the hydraulic brake, or the hydraulic clutch
-all of which, like the lift thatholds everything up, take advantage of the way liquids act under pressure. Somewhat like a pulley or a lever, a hydraulic system magnifies the effect  of moderate pressure exerted over a longer distance into powerful energy for a shorter distance.
 
dehydrate
(1) To remove water from. (2) To deprive of energy and zest .


E.g.
 The boy appeared at dusk staggering out of the desert , dangerously sunburned and dehydrated.


Dehydrating food is a good way to preserve it ; raisins, which are dehydrated grapes, are a good example. Dehydration through industrial processes makes it possible to keep food even longer and st ore itin a smaller space. Freeze-drying produces food that only needs rehydration-thatis, the addition of water-to rest ore it s original consistency. Runners, cyclist s, and hikers fearful of dehydration seem to be constant ly hydrating themselves nowadays, sometimes even using a shoulder pack with a t ube going straightinto the mouth. Dehydrate can also be used for making something "dry" or "lifeless"; thus, a dull teacher can dehydrate American hist ory, and an unimaginative staging can dehydrate a great Shakespeare play.
 
hydroelectric
  Having to do  with  the  production  of  electricity  by waterpower.


E.g.
 A massive African hydroelectric projectis creating the world's largest manmade lake, and is said to hold the key to the future for the country.


The prime component of mosthydroelectric systems is a dam. A high dam funnels water downward athigh pressure to spin turbines, which in turn drive generat ors to produce high- voltage electricity. Mountainous countries with rushing rivers can produce the mosthydroelectricity. Though hydroelectricity comes from a clean and completely renewable energy source, dams disrupt natural systems in a way that disturbs environmentalist s.
 
hydroponics                           The growing of plant s in nutrient solutions, with or without supporting substances such as sand or gravel.


E.g.
 He had never thoughthydroponics produced vegetables as tasty as those grown in soil, and the t omat oes seemed particularly disappointing.


Hydroponics, also known as aquaculture or tank farming, began as  a  way  of  st udying scientifically the mechanisms of plant nutrition. Hydroponically grown plant s may have no solid material under them atall; instead, their root s often simply hang in water with a rich mix of nutrient s dissolved in it . The principal advantage to hydroponics is the savings from reduced labor cost s, since it 's generally carried on in enclosed areas and the irrigation and fertilizing are done mechanically. Peppers, cucumbers, and various other vegetables are produced hydroponically in huge quantities.
 

 
Greek and Latin Borrowings

aegis               (1) Something that protect s or defends; shield. (2) Sponsorship or guidance by an individual or organization.


E.g.
 The conference was held under the aegis of the World Affairs Council, which provided almostall of the funding.


The original aegis was a goat skin shield or breast plate, symbolizing majesty, that was worn by Zeus and his daughter Athena in Greek mythology. Athena's aegis bore the severed head of  the monstrous Medusa. Aegis came to be used for any kind of invulnerable shield. But t oday we almostalways use the word in the phrase "under the aegis of . . . ," which means "under the authority, sponsorship, or control of."
 
charisma                       (1) An extraordinary gift for leadership thatat tract s popular supportand enthusiasm. (2) A special ability to at tract or charm; magnetism.


E.g.
 Many later leaders have envied the charisma of Napoleon Bonaparte, who many of his followers genuinely believed to be immortal.


Charisma is Greek for "gift ," butit s traditional meaning comes from Christian belief, where it originally referred to an extraordinary power-the gift of healing, the gift of t ongues, or the gift of prophecy-best owed on an individual by the Holy Spirit . The first nonreligious use of charisma didn'tappear until the 20th century, when it was applied to that mysterious personal magnetism thata lucky few seem to possess, especially the magnetism with which a political leader can arouse great popular enthusiasm. When John F. Kennedy was elected presidentin 1960, it s use by journalist s popularized the term in the mass media. Since then, act ors, rock stars, athletes, generals, and entrepreneurs have all been said to possess charisma.
 
ego    (1) A sense  of  confidence  and  satisfaction  in  oneself; self-esteem. (2) An exaggerated sense of self-importance.


E.g.
 His raging ego was whathis fellow lawyers remembered abouthim-his tantrums, his vanity, his snobbery, and all the rest of it .


Ego is the Latin word for "I." So if a person seems to begin every sentence with "I," it 's sometimes a sign of a big ego. It was the psychologist Sigmund Freud (well, actually his original translat or) who putego into the popular vocabulary, but whathe meant by the word is complex, so only other psychologist s really use itin the Freudian sense. The rest of us generally use ego simply to mean one's sense of self-worth, whether exaggerated or not . When used in the "exaggerated" sense, ego is almost the same thing as conceit. Meeting a superstar athlete withouta trace of this kind of ego would be a mostrefreshing experience. Buthaving a reasonable sense of your own worth is no sin. Life's lit t le everyday vict ories are good-in fact , necessary-for a healthy ego.
 
ethos             The features, at tit udes, moral code, or basic beliefs that define a person, a group, or an instit ution.


E.g.
 The company's ethos has always been an interesting blend of greed and generosity.


Ethos means "cust om" or "character" in Greek. As originally used by Arist ot le, itreferred to a man's character or personality, especially in it s balance bet ween passion and caution. Today ethos is used to refer to the practices or values that distinguish one person, organization, or society from others. So we often hear of the ethos of rugged individualism and self-sufficiency on the American frontier in the 19th century; and a critic might complain about , for example, the ethos of violence in the inner cities or the ethos of permissiveness in the suburbs.
 
hubris                          Unreasonable or unjustified pride or self-confidence.


E.g.
 Two hours later, the team's boast ful pregame hubris bumped into the embarrassing reality of defeat .


To the Greeks, hubris referred to extreme pride, especially pride and ambition so great that they offend the gods and lead to one's downfall. Hubris was a character flaw often seen in the heroes of classical Greek tragedy, including Oedipus and Achilles. The familiar old saying "Pride goeth before a fall" is basically talking abouthubris.
 

id  The part of a person's unconscious mind thatrelates to basic needs and desires.


E.g.
 His own id often scared him, especially when a sudden violentimpulse would well up out of nowhere.


In Latin, id means simply "it ." Sigmund Freud (and his translat or) brought the word into the modern vocabulary as the name of what Freud believed to be one of the three basic element s of the human personality, the other two being the ego (see ego) and the superego. According to Freud, the id is the first of these to develop, and is the home of the body's basic instinct s, particularly those involving sex and aggression. Since the id lacks logic, reason, or even organization, it can contain conflicting impulses. Primitive in nature, it want s to be satisfied immediately. Although it s workings are completely  unconscious,  Freud  believed  that  it s content s could be revealed in works of art , in slips of the t ongue ("Freudian slips"), and in one's dreams.
 
libido                  (1) Sexual drive. (2) In psychoanalytic theory, energy thatis derived from primitive biological urges and is usually goal-oriented.


E.g.
 She would sitathome trying not to think about where his unmanageable libido had led him this time.


The Latin word libido, meaning "desire, lust ," was borrowed by Sigmund Freud as the name for a conceptin his own theories. At firsthe defined libido to mean the  instinctual energy associated with the sex drive. Later he broadened the word's meaning and began using it to mean the mental energy behind purposeful human activity of any kind; in other words, the libido (for which Freud also used the term eros, a Greek word meaning "sexual love") came to be regarded as the life instinct , which included sex along with all the other impulses we rely on to keep us alive. But those of us who aren't psychologist s use the word simply as a synonym for "sex drive."
 
trauma            (1) A serious injury to the body. (2) An abnormal psychological state caused by mental or emotional stress or physical injury.


E.g.
 Fifteen years later, their adopted Cambodian daughter was still having night mares in which she relived the trauma of those terrible years.


Trauma is the Greek word for "wound." Although the Greeks used the term only for physical injuries, nowadays trauma is justas likely to refer to emotional wounds. We now know thata traumatic event can leave psychological sympt oms long after any physical injuries have healed. The psychological reaction to emotional trauma now has an established name: post-traumatic stress disorder, or PTSD. It usually occurs after an extremely stressful event , such as wartime combat , a natural disaster, or sexual or physical abuse; it s sympt oms include depression, anxiety, flashbacks, and recurring night mares.
 

 

 
