 28


MEDI OID SCOP TRANS PRO PRO RE RE- DERM ENDO
Quiz28-1 Quiz28-2 Quiz28-3 Quiz28-4 Quiz28-5 ReviewQuizzes28

MEDI comes from the Latin medius, meaning "middle." Our word medium refers to something in a middle position. The medieval period of European hist ory, also known as the Middle Ages, is the period bet ween Greek and Roman antiquity and the "modern age." But why people around 1620 began to use the term "Middle Ages," because they regarded themselves as modern, is an interesting question.
 
median                          In the middle; especially, having a value thatis in the middle of a series of values arranged from smallest to largest .


E.g.
 The city's west side is well-off butit s east side isn't , so the city's median house prices are typical for the region.


People often use the word average withoutrealizing that there are two common forms of average. Suppose you want to find the average net worth of a group of people-thatis, the average value of everything they possess. To find one type of average, called the mean, you'd simply add up the t otal value of money and property of everyone in the group and divide it by the number of people. To find the other type, called the median, you'd identify the net worth of the person who is richer than half the people and poorer than the other half. So if Warren Buffet t drove through a tiny village in India, the mean net worth of those in the village would suddenly rise to perhaps a billion dollars, but  their median net worth would remain close to zero. Which figure would be more meaningfulE.g.

 
mediate                        (1) To work with opposing sides in an argument or dispute in order to getan agreement . (2) To achieve a set t lement or agreement by working with the opposing sides.


E.g.
 He was the third person who had at tempted to mediate the dispute bet ween the firm and it s striking workers, the first two having given up in despair.


Mediation is often used in disputes bet ween companies and labor unions, and the governmentactually provides mediators for such disagreement s. The mediat or tries to bring the two sides to an agreement , but doesn'thave the power to actually order such an agreement . Mediat ors also sometimes have a role in international disputes; when two neighboring countries claim exclusive fishing right s in the same ocean waters, for example, they may invite a trained mediat or to help set t le the argument . Arbitration is similar to mediation, butin arbitration both parties in a dispute agree to accept the arbitrat or's decision.
 
intermediary
         A person who works with opposing sides in a dispute in order to bring aboutan agreement .


E.g.
 The divorce had been bit ter, and the two now communicated only through an old friend who they both trusted as an intermediary.


Since inter- means "bet ween, among" (see INTER), an intermediary is someone who moves back and forth in the middle area bet ween two sides-a "go-bet ween." Mediator (which shares the medi- root ) is often a synonym, and so is facilitator; broker and agentare often others. Thus, a real-estate broker or agent shut t les bet ween a house's buyer and seller, who may never even meeteach other. Financial intermediation is whathappens when you put money in a bank or invest ment firm, which then invest s itin various companies; if you want , you can instead cut out the intermediary and invest the money direct ly in companies of your own choosing.
 
mediocrity
     The quality of being not very good.


E.g.
 He's the kind of person who can get depressed by the mediocrity of a dinner, or even a wine.


People interested in words always point out that mediocrity doesn't mean quite whatit s main root would indicate: Why doesn'tit describe something that 's rightin the middle of the pack, exact ly whatyou would expect E.g.
 Instead the words mediocrity and mediocre always suggest disappoint ment . A mediocre play is one you wish you hadn't wasted an evening on, and the mediocre act or in it should probably find another profession. A person can even be called a mediocrity, though itisn't very nice and you'd never do it to his face.
 
OID comes from the Greek word for "appearance" or "form." Since aster in ancient Greek meant "star," the small bodies orbiting bet ween Mars and Jupiter that looked like stars through primitive telescopes were called asteroids. A factoid is a lit t le bit of information that looks like a fact , whether itis or not . And some people these days will at tach -oid to justaboutanything; you can probably figure out the meaning of nutsoid, nerdoid, and freakazoid without much help.
 
rhomboid                       In geometry, a shape with four sides where only the opposite sides and angles are equal.


E.g.
 The flimsy picture frame had been damaged en route, and it s rectangular shape was now a rhomboid.


Rhomboids, like triangles, may take various different shapes, but they always look like a lopsided diamond or rectangle. As both a noun and an adjective, rhomboid can be applied to anything with those shapes, such as certain muscles of the upper back when viewed from behind. Whenever you hear aboutrhomboid exercises, rhomboid strain, or rhomboid pain, itinvolves those muscles, which at tach your shoulder blades to your spine and can be strained by carrying a heavy backpack, serving a tennis ball, or just slumping in your chair in front of a computer all day.
 
delt oid                       A large muscle of the shoulder.


E.g.
 In Anat omy class she had learned about the delt oids, which her trainer at the gym just called "delt s."


The fourth let ter of the Greek alphabetis delta, and a capital delta is triangle-shaped. In English, delta commonly means the sand deposit s that form a huge triangle at the mouth of certain large rivers. Deltoid as an adjective means "having a triangular shape," and botanist s often use the word to describe the shape of certain leaves. The triangular, swept -back wings seen on jet fighter aircraftare called delta wings. Your delt oid muscles-not far from your rhomboids-form a cap on your shoulders, and some gym trainers even treat shoulder and deltoid as synonyms. Can you guess the general shape of delt oids when seen from the sideE.g.

 
dendroid
Resembling a tree in form.


E.g.
 The reef was a fantastic jungle, it s dendroid corals resembling luminous, poisonous trees in a landscape of bizarre beauty.


Dendrology is the st udy of trees, and those who do the st udying are called dendrologists. So dendroid describes something that "branches" in all directions from a central "trunk" in an irregular way. The word is almostalways used by biologist s, who often speak of dendroid seaweeds, dendroid moss, and dendroid algae.
 
humanoid
      Looking or acting like a human.


E.g.
 We slowly learn that most of Dr. Bennell's friends  have  been  replaced  by  humanoid substit utes thathave emerged from pods.


A humanoid robot , sometimes called an android, is a robot thatresembles a human. Account s of the yeti, Sasquatch, and Bigfoot continue to fascinate us mainly because of their humanoid characteristics. The idea of creating a monstrous humanoid, such as the Jewish golem or Vict or Frankenstein's  creation, has  intrigued  us  for  centuries. "Humanoid Animation"  is  a standard for creating humanlike figures for video that let s the same figure be used in a variety of 3-D games-some of which have nothing buthumanoids for characters.
 

 
SCOP, which usually appears in a suffix, comes from the Greek skopein, meaning "to look at ." In English we have the simple noun scope, along with some other words it sometimes stands for: telescope, microscope, periscope, and so on. And have you ever used a stereoscope, a device your great -grandparent s probably enjoyed, which let s you look through a viewer at two slight ly different phot ographs of the same thing, one with each eye, to enjoy the illusion thatyou're seeing itin three dimensionsE.g.

 
endoscope                        A lighted t ubular medical instrument for viewing the interior or a hollow organ or body part that typically has one or more channels to permit passage of surgical instrument s.


E.g.
 Possible uses of the endoscope out side of medicine soon became apparent , and soon mechanics were using specially designed endoscopes to view the insides of jetengines.


The Greek prefix endo- means "within, inside," so around 1860 an early crude instrument for looking deep inside the body was named the endoscope. But modern endoscopy required the invention of the electric light bulb and then fiber-optic cable, so the first modern endoscopes date only to 1967. An endoscope may be inserted through a natural passageway (for example, through the nose or down the esophagus) or through a tiny cutin the skin. A tiny camera with a lightat the end of the cable sends back images onto a screen, and the surgeon uses special instrument s that work through a t ube alongside the cable. There are now specialized types of endoscopes for every part of the body, where they can take tissue samples, cut out small growths, or remove foreign object s.
 
arthroscopic
      Relating to a  fiber-optic  instrument  that  is  inserted through an incision near a joint to examine the joint 's interior.


E.g.
 The day he scheduled the fourth arthroscopic operation on his knee was the day he decided to hang up his foot ball cleat s.


In Greek, arthron means "joint ." Arthritis is a condition of swollen and painful joint s, and arthropods are animals (including insect s, arachnids, and crustaceans) thathave a segmented body and jointed limbs. Arthroscopic surgery, or arthroscopy, has revolutionized the treat ment of jointinjuries. It 's performed with an arthroscope, a specialized type of endoscope (see above). A tiny camera and a lightare inserted through a small cutin the skin, and through another cut nearby a tiny surgical instrument , controlled through it s own cable, is inserted. The surgeon then performs the operation, guided by the images sent back via the fiber-optic cable. Most patient s walk out of the hospital on crutches the same day, though full recovery may take a couple of months.
 
laparoscopy
   Examination of the interior of the abdomen using a fiber- optic instrumentinserted through a cutin the abdomen's wall.


E.g.
 The initial laparoscopy involves inserting the cable through a tiny cutand inflating the internal area with carbon dioxide so thata good-sized area will become visible.


Sin ce laparo- means "wall of the abdomen," a laparoscope is an endoscope designed especially to examine the abdomen. Common laparoscopic surgeries include removal of the gallbladder, appendix, or kidney, and removal of t umors from abdominal organs. Like the other endoscopic surgeries, laparoscopy, as compared to traditional surgery, reduces risk of bleeding, pain following the operation, patientrecovery time, and length of hospital stays.
 
oscilloscope
 An  instrument   that   shows  visual  images  of  changing electrical current on a screen.


E.g.
 An oscilloscope next to the bed was monit oring her vital signs, but otherwise it was hard for a visit or to be sure she was even alive.


In Latin oscillare means "to swing," and our word oscillation usually  means  "vibration"  or "variation," especially in a changing flow of electricity. The oscilloscope basically draws a graph of an electrical signal. Since all kinds of physical phenomena can be converted into an electric voltage, oscilloscopes can be used to measure such things as sound, light , and heat . So an oscilloscope can analyze how one clarinet 's sound is different from another's, or how one bulb's light differs from another's. Auto mechanics use  oscilloscopes to measure  engine vibrations; doct ors use them to measure brain waves. Audio technicians use oscilloscopes to diagnose problems in audio equipment ; TV and radio technicians use them to diagnose TV and radio problems. But oscilloscopes are mostessential t oday to high-tech electronics experimentation.
 
TRANS  comes  from Latin to indicate  movement  "through, across, or beyond"  something. Translation carries a writer's meaning from one language to another. A television signal is sent or transmitted through the air (or a cable) to your set . When making your way through a city on public transportation, you may have to transfer from one bus or subway to another.
 
transient
    (1) Not lasting long; short -lived. (2) Passing through a place and staying only briefly.


E.g.
 It 's a college t own, so much of it s population is transient .


A transient mood is one that passes quickly. A brief  st opover in a t own on your way to somewhere else is a transient visit . A summer job on a farm is transient work, lasting only as long as the growing season. You may occasionally experience a transientepisode of dizziness or weakness, which vanishes withouta trace. As a noun, transient means a person who passes through a place, staying only briefly. The hoboes and tramps of earlier years were some of our most colorful transient s, known  for hopping  freight  trains, panhandling  on  the  street , and stealing homemade pies cooling on the windowsill.
 
transfiguration A change in form or appearance; a glorifying spiritual change.


E.g.
 Being in love caused a complete transfiguration of her personality.


The  Gospels  relate  that  one  day  Jesus  t ook  three  disciples  up  a  mountain, where  they wit nessed his transfiguration into divine form: his face shone like the sun, his garment s became brilliant ly  white,  and  a  voice  from  heaven  proclaimed  that  this  was  the  son  of  God. Transfiguration was first used in English as the name of this biblical event , and the Feast of the Transfiguration remains the name of a holy day. So the word has always kepta somewhatreligious-and almostalways positive-t one. A face may be transfigured by joy, and an "ugly duckling" may be slowly transfigured into a radiant  beauty. And as Harry Pot ter fans know, transfiguration is a subject long taughtat the Hogwart s School by Minerva McGonagall.
 
transponder
  A radio or radar set thatemit s a radio signal after receiving such a signal.


E.g.
 When a patientis admit ted to an emergency room, an implanted transponder can relay important data abouthis or her medical hist ory.


This word was coined during World War I by simply joining pieces of the words transmitter and responder. Transponders are basic to modern aviation and communications satellites, and they're finding new uses in fields such as medicine as well. But they're now also part of everyday  life.  The  "E-ZPass"  that  let s  you  drive  right  through  turnpike  t ollbooths  is  a transponder, and the car you're driving may noteven start unless itrecognizes the signal from your personal key's transponder. In a big crowded footrace, you may carry a tiny transponder on your shoe thatrecords when you cross both the starting line and the finish line.
 
transcendent                          (1) Exceeding or rising above usual limit s; supreme. (2) Beyond comprehension; beyond ordinary experience or material existence.


E.g.
 Despite the chaos around her she remained calm, with a transcendent smile on her face.


The Latin verb scandere means "to climb," so transcend has the basic meaning of climbing so high thatyou cross some boundary. A transcendentexperience is one that takes you out of yourself and convinces you of a larger life or existence; in this sense, it means something close to "spiritual." The American writers and thinkers known as the Transcendentalists, including Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau, believed in the unity of all creation, the basic goodness of humankind, and the superiority of spiritual vision over mere logic. When we speak of the transcendentimportance of an issue such as climate change, we may mean thateverything else on earth actually depends on it .
 

 
PRO is an important prefix, with a couple of quite different broad meanings. In this section, we'll look at words in which pro- has the basic meaning "for" or "favoring." Everyone knows words lik e pro-democracy and pro-American, but other pro- words may not be quite so  self- explanat ory.
 
proactive                           Acting in anticipation of future problems, needs, or changes.


E.g.
 Our president prides  himself on being proactive, and is  always imagining situations  the company might be facing in three or four years.


People who tend to react to a problem only when it 's got ten serious could be called reactive people. Until recent ly, reactive (in this sense) didn'treally have an ant onym. So proactive was coined to describe the kind of person who's always looking into the future in order to be prepared for anything. A good parentat tempt s to be proactive on behalf of his or her children, trying to imagine the problems they might be facing in a few months or years. A company's financial officers st udy the pat terns of the company's earnings to make sure it won'trisk running short of cash atany pointin the nextyear or t wo. Proactive has only been around a few decades, and it can still sometimes sound like a fashionable buzzword.
 
pro bono                      Being, involved in, or doing professional work, and especially legal work, donated for the public good.


E.g.
 The law firm allows her to do several hours of pro bono work every week, and she devotes it to helping poor immigrant families.


In Latin, pro bono publico means "for the public good"; in English we generally shorten the phrase to pro bono. Donating free legal help to those who need ithas long been a practice of American law firms; the American Bar Association actually recommends thatall lawyers donate 50 hours a year. Pro bono work is sometimes donated by nonlegal firms as well. For example, an advertising firm might produce a 60-second video for an environmental or educational organization, or a strategic-planning firm might prepare a start -up plan for a charity that funds shelters for bat tered women.
 
proponent
    One who argues in favor of something: advocate.


E.g.
 The new governor is a proponent of a longer school year, and he's got ten a lot of support from parent s.


Proponent comes from the same Latin word as propose, so a proponentis someone who proposes something, or at least support s it by speaking and writing in favor of it . Thus, for example, proponent s of casinos argue that they create jobs, whereas proponent s of a casino ban-thatis, casino opponents-argue that they're corrupting and they take money away from people who can'tafford it . As a rule, justaboutanything important that get s proposed also get s opposed.
 
pro forma
  Done or existing as something thatis required but thathas lit t le true meaning or importance.


E.g.
 The let ter she received from him after her husband's death struck her as pro forma, and she knew the old friendship bet ween the two men had never really been repaired.


A lot of things are done for the sake of appearances. A teacher might get officially observed and evaluated every three years, even though everyone knows she's terrific and the whole thing is strict ly pro forma. A critic might say thata orchestral conduct or gave a pro forma performance, since his heart wasn'tin it . A business owner might make a pro forma appearance at the funeral of a politician's mother, never having mether but maybe hoping for a favor from her son sometime in the future. In business, pro forma has some special meanings; a pro forma invoice, for example, will listall the items being sent but , unlike a true invoice, won't be an actual bill.
 
PRO, in it s other broad meaning, means "before, in front of." So, for example, to proceed means "to move outin front "; to progress means to "to move forward"; and somebody prominent stands out , as if he or she were actually standing outin front of the crowd.
 
protrude                       To jut out from the surrounding surface or context .


E.g.
 As he leaned over, she noticed something protruding from under his jacket , and realized with a sickening feeling thathe was armed.


Since trudere means "to thrust " in Latin, protrude means basically "to thrust forward." If your neighbors' patio protrudes over your property boundary, you may want to discuss it with them. A protruding disc in your spine may have to be operated on sooner or later; superficial protrusions, such as corns or bunions, tend to be less serious than more deeply rooted ones.
 
prophylaxis
  Measures designed to preserve health and prevent  the spread of disease.


E.g.
 For rabies, prophylaxis in the form of vaccines for cat s and dogs is much bet ter than treating them after being bit ten.


In Greek, phylax means "guard," so prophylactic measures guard against disease by taking action ahead of time. Thus, for example, before the polio vaccine became available, prophylaxis against polio included avoiding crowds and public swimming pools. These days a well-known kind of prophylactic is used to prevent sexually transmit ted diseases; but prophylactic measures only work when people use them.
 
promulgate
    (1) To proclaim or make public. (2) To put (a law) into effect .


E.g.
 The country's new constit ution was officially promulgated in a grand ceremony at the presidential palace.


All laws need to be made public in some way so that citizens may know if they're in danger of breaking them. Since they can't be expected to go into effect until the population knows they exist , promulgate has the two meanings "proclaim" and "putinto effect ." In ancient Greece and Rome, when most people couldn'tread, a new writ ten law would actually be proclaimed in a public place; we've all seen such scenes in hist orical movies. But t oday promulgation of a law generally occurs simply by it s being published in an official government publication and on a government Web site. New laws are also often reported in newspapers and on TV, though rarely in complete form.
 
prologue     (1) An introduction to a literary work. (2) An introduct ory event  or development .


E.g.
 The Bost on Tea Party of 1773 turned out to be a prologue to the American Revolution.


In ancient Greek drama, the prologos (a word that means basically "speaking before") was the opening portion of the play, before the entry of the all-importantchorus. It might be spoken by a single act or, maybe playing a god, who would "set the scene" for the audience. Playwright s t oday instead often provide the same kind of "scene-set ting" information through dialogue near the play's beginning; in movies, it may appear (as in the "Star Wars" series) in the form of actual writ ten text . In a nonfiction book, the lead-in is now usually called a preface or introduction; novels rarely provide any introduction atall. Still, prologue remains a useful word for nonliterary purposes. The saying "The pastis prologue" tells us that , in real life, almosteverything can be a prologue to what follows it .
 

 
RE is a prefix which, like pro- (see PRO), has more than one meaning. In this section, we'll focus on the meaning "again." We use re- words with this meaning every day-redo, reheat, recheck, reread, resell, repaint, et c.-and we feel free to make up new ones as needed. Butin plenty of other re- words, the meaning isn't so obvious.
 
remorse                     A deep regretarising from a sense of guilt for past wrongs.


E.g.
 Remorse for the accident that occurred that night seems to have altered the course of the senat or's life.


In Latin, mordere means "to bite"; thus, remorse is something that "gnaws" atyou over and over. In criminal court , judges are always looking for signs thata convicted felon is suffering remorse for his crime; if not , the judge may well lengthen his sentence or deny him parole after serving part of it . Remorse is stronger than mere regret ; real remorse is the kind of thing that may lasta lifetime.
 
reiterate                           To state or do over again or repeatedly.


E.g.
 At the end of every class, Professor Lewis reiterates that we should getan early start on our term papers.


In Latin, iterum means "again," so reiterate has the basic meaning of "repeat over and over." Our word iteration is used a lot by computer programmers t oday, often meaning a repeated response to program instructions that get s something closer to it s final form, butalso often meaning a new version of something, such as a program. Buta reiteration is simply a repeat or several repeat s.
 
rejuvenate
  To make young or youthful again; to give new vigor t o.


E.g.
 He was in bad shape after his wife's death, buteveryone says he's been rejuvenated by his remarriage.


Juvenis, Latin for "young," can be seen in a word such as juvenile. Rejuvenation is something that can be carried out on a creaky old house, a clunker of a car, a sluggish career, a weak economy, or a company that 's lostit s edge, butrejuvenate and rejuvenation are probably used most often for talking about our physical selves. Ads for lotions promise skin rejuvenation; diet - book covers show rejuvenated (or maybe justyoung) models bursting with health. We still seem to be searching for that "Fuente de la Juvent ud" that Juan Ponce de Le¨®n failed to discover five hundred years ago.
 
reconcile                           (1) To make agree. (2) To make friendly again.


E.g.
 Now she has to reconcile her liking for her brother-in-law with the news thathe was picked up for armed robbery last week.


In Latin, conciliare means "to calm, soothe"; thus, reconcile means essentially "to calm again." Warring friends can often be reconciled by a nice note or apology. When you're faced with two things that don't square very well, you may have to reconcile them, the way a scientist might try to reconcile the differing result s from two research project s. The U.S. House and Senate, in a  process  called reconciliation, try to produce one final bill from two different  versions that they've passed separately. To reconcile yourself to something means to get used to it ; thus, you may need to reconcile yourself to not get ting to the beach next summer, or you may have reconciled yourself to the idea of your daughter in the Peace Corps marrying a Mongolian goatherder.
 
RE-, in it s other main sense, means "back" or backward." Since doing something again means going back to it , the two senses are actually related; still, the meaning of re- in most words is pret ty clearly one or the other. So a rebound comes back atyou; to recall means to "call back" a memory; and to reactis to "act back" at someone else's action.
 
reciprocal
 (1) Done, given, or feltequally by both sides. (2) Related to each other in such a way that one completes the other or is the equal of the other.


E.g.
 They had done us a great favor, so as a reciprocal gesture we invited them for a weekend on the island.


In Latin, reciprocus means "returning the same way" or "alternating." So in a reciprocating engine, like  the  one  in  your  car, the  pist ons  move  back  and  forth, and  that  motion  is transformed into the rotary motion of the crankshaft . A reciprocal is a pair of numbers (such as 5/6 and 6/5) that can be multiplied to produce 1. Reciprocity (with the accent on the third syllable) bet ween two nations means they agree to recognize certain things granted in one country as being valid in the other-for example, your driver's license.
 
rebut                 (1) To oppose by argument . (2) To prove to be wrong.


E.g.
 The claims aboutreceiving payoffs from builders were eventually rebut ted by the mayor's office, but the damage had been done.


The -butin rebut once meant basically "but t ," so rebut's original meanings were "to drive or beat back" and "to at tack  with violent language." Rebuttals can still be rather violent , as anyone who has watched some heated moment s in a presidential debate can testify. The word is often used by lawyers, since the lawyer for the accused or for the party being sued almostalways tries to rebut the charges againsthis or her client ; butit 's also used in plenty of context s out side the courtroom.
 
revoke     To officially cancel the power or effect of something (such as a law, order, or privilege).


E.g.
 His real-estate license had been revoked after his conviction for fraud three years earlier.


Since vocare means "to call" in Latin (see VOC), to revoke is to "call back." Your driver's license could be revoked after about three convictions for driving under the influence of alcohol; some people's licenses are even revoked for life. You could get  your passport  revoked if a judge thoughtyou had violated the terms of your bail and suspected you might skip the country. And if you're out of prison on probation and violate the terms of probation, it will probably be revoked and you'll end up back in the slammer.
 
regress                   To return to an earlier and usually worse or less developed condition or state.


E.g.
 In the years since she had left , the country seemed to have  regressed  badly, and  it s corruption and dire poverty had got ten much harder to ignore.


As you  might guess, regress is the opposite of progress. So if a disease regresses, that 's generally a good thing, butin most other ways we prefer not to regress. If someone's mental state has been improving, we hope he or she won't start to regress; and when a nation's promising educational system begins to regress, that 's a bad sign for the country's future. Economist s often distinguish bet ween a progressive tax and a regressive tax; in a progressive tax, the percentage that goes to taxes get s larger as the amount of money being taxed get s larger, while in a regressive tax the percentage get s smaller. (Rich people prefer regressive  taxes.)
 

 
DERM comes from the Greek derma, meaning "skin." For medical advice on a skin problem such as acne, we may go to a dermatologist, or skin specialist . When we geta shot , it 's usually with  a hypodermic, a needle that goes "under the skin" (see HYP/HYPO). A pachyderm is a "thick-skinned" animal, which most of us just call an elephant .
 
dermal                      Relating to the skin and especially to the dermis.


E.g.
 The agency is always st udying what can be done to prevent dermal exposure to chemicals in the workplace.


The word dermal often comes up nowadays in connection with cosmetic treat ment s. Dermal therapy usually means rest oring moisture to dry, cracked skin. Dermal fillers such as collagen can  be  injected to fill in  acne  scars or reduce  wrinkles. These  have  now  been  joined  by treat ment s like Bot ox, which paralyzes facial dermal muscles, again in order to reduce wrinkles (since those dermal muscles are used to form expressions). A synonym for dermal is cutaneous.
 
epidermis
  The outer layer of the skin.


E.g.
 The epidermis is the body's first line of defense againstinfection, external injury, and environmental stresses.


Epidermis includes the Greek prefix epi-, meaning "outer" (see EPI); thus, the epidermis overlies th e dermis, or inner layer of skin. The  epidermis it self consist s of four or five layers; the outermost layer is made of dead cells, which are being shed continuously. The epidermis act s as a physical barrier-a protective wrap over the body's surface, which, by preventing water loss, allows vertebrates to live on land.
 
taxidermist
 One who prepares, st uffs, and mount s the skins of dead animals.


E.g.
 The taxidermist suggested that the bobcat be displayed in the act of leaping fiercely t oward the viewer.


Taxidermist s are called on not  only by sport smen and collect ors but  by museums, movie st udios, and advertisers. Taxidermist s firstremove the skin (with it s fur, hair, or feathers), then create a plaster cast of the carcass with which to produce a "mannequin," on which they replace the skin. Producing trophies of lifelike quality that often recreate an exciting momentrequires physical skill, at tention to detail, and sometimes artistic talent .
 
dermatitis
Inflammation of the skin.


E.g.
 The only dermatitis she had ever suffered had been the result of playing in poison ivy when she was lit t le.


Dermatitis usually appears as a rash, and may cause itching, blisters, swelling, and often scabbing and scaling. It often marks an allergic reaction of some kind. Contact dermatitis is caused by something (often a chemical) t ouching the skin. Atopic dermatitis usually affect s the insides of the elbows, the backs of the knees, and the face; generally resulting from an inherited sensitivity, it 's often triggered by inhaling something. Eczema, psoriasis, and dandruff are all forms of dermatitis. Even in the worst cases, dermatitis isn'tinfectious and doesn't produce serious health consequences.
 
ENDO comes from the Greek endon, meaning "within." In English itappears almostalways in scientific terms, especially in biology. A nonscientific endo-  word is endogamy, meaning marriage within a specific group as required by cust om or law-one of the many cust oms that can be seen everywhere from the mostremote tribes to the  highest  society  in  wealthy countries.
 
endocrine
   (1) A hormone. (2) Any of several glands (such as the thyroid) that pour their secretions direct ly into the blood or lymph.


E.g.
 Since the endocrines are so vital to human life, affecting such things as cell growth and blood sugar, the chemicals known as endocrine disrupters can be destructive and even deadly.


The body's glands remove specific substances from the blood and alter them for rerelease into the blood or removal. Glands such as those that produce saliva and sweat secrete their product s through tiny duct s or t ubes on or near the body's surface. The glands without duct s, called the endocrine glands, instead secrete their product s into the bloodstream; the endo- rootindicates that the secretions are internal rather than on the surface. The endocrine system includes such glands as the pit uitary (which controls  growth, regulates the other endocrines, and performs many other tasks), the thyroid (another growth gland thatalso influences  metabolism),  the  adrenals  (which  secrete  adrenaline  and   steroids),   the hypothalamus (which influences sleep and weightregulation), and the ovaries (which produce eggs). Endocrine problems are treated by endocrinologists.
 
endodontic
 Relating to a branch of dentistry that deals with the pulp of the teeth.


E.g.
 Her dentist t old her the problem was endodontic and that she should see a specialist soon to prevent loss of the t ooth.


Endodontists, as you mightexpect from the endo- root , deal with the interior of the t ooth. The t ooth's enamel, on the out side, covers a thick layer called the dentin; this in turn surrounds the innermost part , called the pulp, a mass of soft tissue through which nerves and blood vessels run. When a t ooth has been badly damaged by decay or cracking, producing a risk of dangerous infection of the pulp, a "root canal" procedure is performed by an endodontist . Try to avoid ever get ting to know an  endodontist ; brush  your teeth  t wice  daily, floss  before bedtime, and never leta cavity go unfilled for long.
 
endogenous
      Developing or originating within a cell, organ, body, or system.


E.g.
 Vitamin D can be obtained from food and supplement s, butit 's also an endogenous vitamin, produced by the body when the skin is exposed to sunlight .


When biologist s need to make a distinction bet ween things thatare produced within a cell or organ and things thataffectit from the out side, they use the terms endogenous and exogenous. It used to be thought , for instance, that mutations in cells always resulted from exogenous causes, until it was discovered that substances in the body, including those called oxidant s, could cause them endogenously as well. "Circadian rhythms"-the regular cycles, roughly 24 hours in length, that plant s, animals, and humans rely on to regulate their days-are endogenously generated and don'tactually depend on the sun for their timing.
 
endorphin
 Any of a group of proteins in the brain thatare able to relieve pain.


E.g.
 On the final stretch of her daily five-mile run, she could usually count on the endorphins kicking in, giving her that beautiful "runner's high."


The word endorphin was coined, back when the substances were discovered in the 1970s, by joining pieces of endogenous and morphine, morphine being a narcotic that closely resembles the endorphins and relieves pain in a similar way. St udies suggest that the pain-relieving practice called acupuncture (see acupuncture) works by releasing endorphins. Endorphins also seem to play an importantrole in pregnancy. Though much remains to be learned about the endorphins, the general public seems ready to give them credit for any all-natural high.
 

 

 
