 21


SUB HYPER PRE PARA META PER ANT/ANTI CONTRA GreekandLatinBorrowings
Quiz21-1 Quiz21-2 Quiz21-3 Quiz21-4 Quiz21-5 ReviewQuizzes21

SUB means "under." So a subway runs under the street s, and a submarine moves under the ocean's surface. A subjectis a person under the authority of another. A movie's subplotis lower in importance than the main plot . Subscribe once meant "to write one's name underneath," so subscription was the act of signing a document or agreement .
 
subconscious
  Existing in the mind just below the level of awareness.


E.g.
 After dropping three dishes in a week, she began thinking there might be some kind of subconscious agitation behind her case of but terfingers.


We're rarely aware, or at least fully aware, of our subconscious mental activity. But subconscious thought does affect our feelings and behavior, and it 's often revealed in dreams, artistic expression, and slips of the t ongue. The subconscious mind can be a hiding place for anxiety, a source of creativity, and often the reason behind our own mysterious behavior.
 
subjugate
 To bring under control and rule as a subject ; conquer, subdue.


E.g.
 The country's government claimed it was just trying to protect national security, but some saw it s actions as an at tempt to subjugate the news media.


Since jugus means "yoke" in Latin, subjugate means literally "bring under the yoke." Farmers control oxen by means of a heavy wooden yoke over their shoulders. In ancientrome, conquered soldiers, stripped of their uniforms, mightactually be forced to pass under an ox yoke as a sign of submission to the Roman vict ors. Even withoutan  actual yoke, whathappens to a population thathas come under the control of another can be every bitas humiliating. In dozens of countries throughout the world, ethnic minorities are denied basic right s and view themselves as subjugated by their country's government , army, and police.
 
subliminal                    Not   quite  strong  enough to be  sensed  or  perceived consciously.


E.g.
 A few worried parent s claimed that some heavy-metal songs contain subliminal messages- in the form of words recorded backwards-thaturge young fans to take up devil worship.


Since  the  Latin  word limen means "threshold,"  something subliminal exist s just  below  the threshold of conscious awareness. The classic example of a subliminal message is "Eat popcorn" flashed on a movie screen so quickly that the audience doesn'teven notice it consciously. Actually, no such advertising has ever been shown to work. But ordinary ads, both in printand on TV, do contain all kinds of images that shape our response to the product being advertised even when we don'trealize it . Try looking carefully at some ads thatyou like, in order to discover how many ways they may be subliminally affecting you.
 
subversion
 (1) An  at tempt to overthrow  a  government  by  working secret ly from within. (2) The corrupting of someone or something by weakening their morals, loyalty, or faith.


E.g.
 It 's sometimes easier for a government to combatat tack from out side than subversion from within.


Subversion is literally the "turning over" of something. In the 1950s and '60s, many people worried about communist subversion of the U.S. government , though they often saw subversive activities where none existed. Nondemocratic government s often claim thatanyone who disagrees with them or joins a demonstration is a subversive. But subversion isn'talways quite so  serious a  mat ter; when  words like weekend, sandwich,  job, a n d camping started being used by the French, for example, some of them began claiming thatamerica was subverting their language.
 
HYPER is a Greek prefix that means "above or beyond," so hyper- often means about the same thing as super-. Hyperinflation is inflation that 's growing ata very high rate. To be hypercritical or hypersensitive  is to be critical or sensitive  beyond the normal. And if you hyperextend a knee or elbow, it means you're actually bending it backward.
 
hyperactive
     Excessively active.


E.g.
 Stephen King's hyperactive imagination has produced dozens of fantastical st ories, not to mention count less night mares in his readers.


For doct ors and psychologist s, hyperactive describes a condition with unpleasant consequences. Hyperactive children usually have a very shortat tention span and can't sit still, and hyperactivity can lead to difficulty in learning or just get them in trouble for disturbing their classes. But notevery high-spirited child is hyperactive. Having a high energy level is pret ty normal for children, and some parent s think that prescribing drugs for hyperactivity is most ly just good for the drug companies.
 
hyperbole
   Extreme exaggeration.


E.g.
 The food at Chez Pierre was good, butit couldn't live up to the hyperbole of the restaurant critics.


Advertisers and sport s commentat ors make their living by their skillful  use of  hyperbole. Presenting each year's Superbowl as "the greatest contestin the hist ory of sport s" certainly qualifies as hyperbole, especially since the final scores are usually so lopsided. Equally hyperbolic are advertisers' claims that this year's new car model is "the revolutionary vehicle you've been waiting for" when it 's barely different from lastyear's-which of course was once described in  the same  glowing  terms. Politicians love  hyperbole  t oo; some  of them seem convinced that calling a new bill "the worst bill ever passed by Congress" or comparing the president to Hit ler is a great way to win votes.
 
hypertension
     High blood pressure.


E.g.
 Pregnancy is often accompanied by mild hypertension that doesn't threaten the mother's life.


You mighthave thought thathypertension was whata movie audience feels near the climax of a thriller, butyou would have been wrong. High blood pressure-thatis high pressure against the walls of your veins and arteries caused by blood flow-often occurs when the arteries or veins become blocked or narrowed, making the heart work harder to pump blood. But many cases seem to be the result of smoking or taking in t oo much salt , and many are genetically caused. Hypertension is serious, since it can lead to heartat tacks and strokes. Though it often produces no warning sympt oms, your blood pressure can be checked quickly and easily by a nurse. If it 's high, it can usually be controlled by st opping smoking, losing weight , lowering your saltintake, and exercising-and if all else fails, by medication.
 
hyperventilate
        To breathe rapidly and deeply.


E.g.
 They laughed so hard they began to hyperventilate and feel giddy.


Hyperventilating can be a response to fear and anxiety. A test pilot who panics and hyperventilates faces a dangerous situation. When the level of carbon dioxide in your blood goes down and the oxygen level goes up, blood vessels constrict because of the chemical changes and the body can't getenough oxygen (even though it 's there in the blood), and the pilot can become lightheaded and may even faint . To guard against this, pilot s are taught to control their breathing. On the ground, the usual remedy for hyperventilation is breathing into a paper bag, which raises the level of carbon dioxide and rest ores normal breathing.
 

 
PRE, one of the most common of all English prefixes, comes from prae, the Latin word meaning "before" or "in front of." So a prediction forecast s what will happen before it occurs. The 5:00 TV news precedes the 6:00 news. And someone with a prejudice againsta class of people has judged them before having even met them.
 
preclude                      To make impossible beforehand; prevent .


E.g.
 If we accept this cash offer from the company, that will preclude our joining in the big suitagainstit with the other invest ors.


Preclude is often used in legal writing, where it usually refers to making something legally impossible. A new law may be passed by Congress to preclude any suit s of a certain kind againsta federal agency, for example. Some judges have found that the warnings on cigaret te packs preclude any suit s against the t obacco companies by lung-cancer sufferers. But there are plenty of nonlegal uses as well. Bad weather often precludes trips to the beach, and a lack of cash might preclude any beach vacation atall.
 
precocious                           Showing the qualities or abilities of an adultatan unusually early age.


E.g.
 Everyone agrees that their seven-year-old daughter is smartand precocious, but she's also get ting rather full of herself.


Growing from a child to an adultis like the slow ripening of fruit , and that 's the image that gave us precocious. The word is based on the Latin verb coquere, meaning "to ripen" or "to cook," butit comes most direct ly from the adjective praecox, which means "ripening early or before it s time." Precocity can occasionally be annoying; but precocious children don't come precooked, only "preripened."
 
predispose
    (1) To influence in advance in order to create a particular at tit ude. (2) To make one more likely to develop a particular disease or physical condition.


E.g.
 Growing up in a house full of sisters had predisposed her to find her friendships with other women.


Predispose usually means put ting someone in a frame of mind to be willing to do something. So a longtime belief in the essential goodness of people, for example, will predispose us to trusta stranger. Teachers know that coming from a stable family  generally  predisposes children to learn. And viewing television violence for years may leave young people with a predisposition to acceptreal violence as normal. The medical sense of the word is similar. Thus, a person's genes may predispose her to diabetes or arthritis, and malnutrition over a long period can predispose you to all kinds of infections.
 
prerequisite
   Something thatis required in advance to achieve a goal or to carry outa function.


E.g.
 In most states, minimal insurance coverage is a prerequisite for registering an aut omobile.


Prerequisite is part ly based on requirere, the Latin verb meaning "to need or require." So a prerequisite can be anything that must be accomplished or acquired before something else can be done. Possessing a valid credit card is a prerequisite for renting a car. A physical exam may be a prerequisite for receiving a life-insurance policy. And successful completion of an introduct ory course is often a prerequisite for enrolling in a higher-level course.
 
PARA is a Greek prefix usually meaning "beside" or "closely related t o." So parallel lines run beside each other. And a Greek paragraphos was originally a line writ ten beside the main text of a play to show where a new person begins speaking; t oday we just starta new paragraph on a new line.
 
paraphrase                   To restate the meaning (of something writ ten or spoken) in different words.


E.g.
 She started off the class by asking one of the st udent s to paraphrase the Tennyson poem, to make sure everyone underst ood it s basic meaning.


When we paraphrase, we provide a version that can exist beside the original (rather than replace it ). We paraphrase all the time. When you tell a friend what someone else has said, you're almostalways paraphrasing, since you're notrepeating the exact words. If you go to hear a talk, you might paraphrase the speaker's main point s afterward for your friends. And when writing a paper on a short st ory, you might start off your essay with a paraphrase of the plot . Paraphrasing is especially useful when dealing with poetry, since poetic language is often difficultand poems may have meanings thatare hard to pin down.
 
paralegal
    Of, relating t o, or being a trained assistant to a lawyer.


E.g.
 Part of the firm's business involved  researching real-estate properties, which the senior lawyers regarded as paralegal work.


Much of the work in a law office can be done by paralegal assistant s, also called legal aides or simply paralegals, who work alongside licensed lawyers. Often a paralegal is trained in a narrow field and then entrusted with it . In this respect , paralegals are similar to paraprofessionals in other fields, such as engineering. Paraprofessionals used to be trained in the office it self, but t oday it 's common to st udy for a paraprofessional certificate or degree ata community college or university.
 
paramedic
  A specially trained medical technician licensed to provide a wide range of emergency services before or during transportation to a hospital.


E.g.
 Five ambulances had already arrived, and a dozen paramedics were crouched over the victims with bandages and IVs.


In ground warfare, wounded troops must usually be transported from the front lines back to field hospitals, and trained paramedical personnel-thatis, nondoct ors, usually known as medics or corpsmen-were first widely used in such situations. It t ook many decades for the wartime model to be applied effectively to ordinary peacetime medicine. With advances in medical technology (such as defibrillat ors, for restarting a heartafter a heartat tack), paramedics  became  an  essential  part  of  emergency  medicine,  and  t oday  hundreds  of thousands of people owe their lives to paramedics. Paraprofessionals  who  work  only  in hospitals and clinics usually go by other tit les.
 
paramilitary
    Relating to a  force  formed  on  a  military  pat tern, especially as a possible backup military force.


E.g.
 In the country's mostremote regions, the real power was held by large landowners, who actually kept paramilitary forces, their own private armies, on their estates.


This term paramilitary can take in a wide range of organizations, butis usually applied to forces formed by a government . Groups opposing a government , even when organized along military lines, are more often referred to as guerrillas or insurgent s. In countries with weak central government s (such as, in recent times, Afghanistan, Somalia, Iraq, or Congo), warlords may form their own paramilitary forces and take over all local police and military functions. Paramilitary often has a sinister sound t oday, since it 's also applied to groups of off-duty military or police personnel who carry outillegal violence, often at night , with the quiet support of a government .
 

 
META is a prefix in English that generally means "behind" or "beyond." In medicine, for example, the metacarpal bones are the hand bones that come rightafter, or beyond, the carpal or wrist bones. And metalanguage is language used to talk about language, which requires going beyond normal language.
 
metadata
     Data that provides information about other data.


E.g.
 Before put ting videos up on the Web site, she always tags them with a decent set of metadata.


Metadata is electronic data that somehow describes an electronic file or it s content s, and is usually included in the file it self. An important use for metadata is for searching. A piece of metadata mightidentify the file, it s size, the date it was compiled, it s nature, and so on. Metadata is particularly important for making pictures searchable; since a picture of a landscape in the Southwest , for example, can't be "read" by a search engine, data tags such as "Southwest ," "mesa," and "arroyo" might be included in the digitized image file. The same can be done for audio files; the tags for a speech mightread "Gore," "climate," and "Copenhagen." Metadata tags for a Web page, including tags identifying it s mostimportant content , ensure that the page won't be overlooked by a search engine.
 
metaphorical                          Relating to a figure of speech in which a word or phrase meaning one kind of object or idea is used in place of another to suggesta similarity bet ween them.


E.g.
 He always point s out to his classes that metaphors can be found in poetry of all kinds, from "The eyes are the windows of the soul" to "You ain't nothin' buta hound dog."


Metaphor comes from a Greek word meaning "transfer" (or, to stay close to it s root s, "carry beyond"). Thus, a metaphor transfers the meaning  of  one  word  or  phrase to another. Metaphors often include a form of the verb be (as in the examples above), and they're often contrasted with similes, which are usually introduced by like or as ("O, my luve's like a red, red rose"). But , they don'thave to include be; when you say that the teacher gave us a mountain of homework or that we're drowning in paperwork, these t oo are metaphorical statement s.
 
metaphysics                          The  part  of  philosophy  having to do  with  the  ultimate causes and basic nature of things.


E.g.
 Most of the congregation prefers to hear their minister preach about virt ue, and they getrest less when his sermons head in the direction of metaphysics.


Justas physics deals with the laws that govern the physical world (such as those of gravity or the properties of waves), metaphysics describes whatis beyond physics-the nature and origin of reality it self, the immortal soul, and the existence of a supreme being. Opinions about these metaphysical t opics vary widely, since what 's being discussed can't be observed or measured or even truly known to exist . So most metaphysical questions are still as far from a final answer as they were when Plato and Arist ot le were asking them.
 
met onymy
A figure of speech in which the name of one thing is used for the name of something else thatis associated with it or related to it .


E.g.
 When Wall Streethas the jit ters, the White House issues a statement , and the people wait for answers from City Hall, met onymy is having a busy day.


At first glance, metaphor and metonymy seem close in meaning, but there are differences. In a metaphor we substit ute one thing for something else that 's usually quite different ; for example, Web for a worldwide net work of linked computers and their technology. In met onymy, we replace one word or phrase (such as "st ock market "  or "local government officials"  in the examples above) with another word or phrase associated with it . Most familiar metonyms are place-names, such as Hollywood for "the film industry," or K Street for "Washingt on lobbyist s." But saying "the press" to refer to the news media, or "sweat " to refer to hard work, could also be called met onymy.
 
PER is a Latin preposition that generally means "through," "throughout ," or "thoroughly." Thus, perforate means "to bore through," perennial means "throughout the years," and permanent means  "remaining  throughout ."  And  the  "thoroughly"  sense  shows  up  in persuade,  for "thoroughly advise," and perverted, "thoroughly turned around."
 
percolate                    (1) To trickle or filter through something porous. (2) To become spread through.


E.g.
 She tells herself that the money she spends on luxuries eventually percolates down to the needy.


Percolate comes from a Latin verb meaning "to put through a  sieve."  Something  that percolates filters through something else, justas small particles pass through a sieve. Water is drawn downward through the soil, and this percolation usually cleans the water. A slow rain is ideal for percolating into the soil, since in a violentrainst orm most of it quickly runs off. For this reason, drip irrigation is the mosteffective and water-conserving form of irrigation. Percolation isn'talways a physical process; awareness of an issue may percolate slowly into the minds of the public, justas Spanish words may gradually percolate into English, often starting in the Southwest .
 
pervade                       To spread through all part s of something.


E.g.
 We all knew that more job cut s were coming, and the entire office was pervaded with anxiety.


Pervade can be used to describe something physical: a chemical odor may pervade a building, for example, and most scientist s believe that outer space is pervaded by mysterious "dark mat ter." But the word usually doesn'trefer to anything that could be detected by scientific instrument s. Thus, humor may pervade a novel, gloom may pervade  a  gathering,  and corruption may pervade a government . And something pervasive exist s in  every  part  of something: fatherlessness may be a pervasive problem in poor neighborhoods, for instance, and pervasive optimism sometimes causes the st ock market to soar.
 
permeate                (1) To spread throughout . (2) To pass through the pores or small openings of.


E.g.
 On Saturday mornings back in those days, the aroma of fresh pies and  breads  would permeate almostevery house on the block.


Permeate is often a synonym for pervade. We could say, for example, thatatexam time the campus is either "permeated" or "pervaded" by a sense of dread. But the two words aren'tidentical. For one thing, permeate can mean simply "pass through," and is often used when talking about liquids; thus, a boot can be permeated by water, though certain oils make leather less permeable, and you might  just  want to buy boot s made of impermeable material. And things may "pass through" in a nonphysical way as well; so you might say thatanxiety about climate change has started to permeate into the public's consciousness-but once anxiety has become pervasive it 's pret ty much taken over.
 
persevere       To  keep  at  something  in  spite  of  difficulties,  opposition,  or discouragement .


E.g.
 For ten years she persevered in her effort to find out what the government knew abouther husband's disappearance.


The early set t lers of the New World persevered in the face of constanthardship and danger. The Pilgrims of Plymouth Plantation losthalf their number in the first winter to disease and hunger, but their perseverance paid off, and within five years their community was healthy and self-sufficient . Perhaps more remarkable are all the solitary invent ors who have persevered in pursuing their visions for years, lacking any financial supportand laughed at by the public.
 

 
ANT/ANTI is a Latin prefix meaning "against ." An anticlimax is the opposite of a climax. An antiseptic or antibiotic fight s germs. An antacid at tacks acid in the st omach. And an antidote works against the effect s of a poison.
 
antagonist                      A person who opposes or is unfriendly t oward another; an opponent .


E.g.
 With supplies ordered from the Acme Company, Road Runner's constantantagonist , Wile E. Coyote, at tempt s one dastardly deed after another.


On the stage or screen, in a st ory or a novel, the protagonistis the main character and the antagonistis the opposing one. Pro- and ant- usually mark the good and bad characters, but notalways; there may occasionally be an evil protagonistand a good antagonist . In the drama of the real world, it 's especially hard to sort out which is which, so we usually speak of both parties to a conflictas antagonist s. During a strike, for example, representatives of labor and management become antagonist s; they often manage to antagonize each other, and the antagonism often remains after the strike is over.
 
antigen                         A chemical substance (such as a protein) that , when introduced into the body, causes the body to form antibodies againstit .


E.g.
 When the immune system is weak, it may not be able to produce enough antibodies to combat the invading antigens.


An antibody is a protein produced by your immune system to fight out side invaders. Since the enemy substance actually triggers the production of antibodies, such substances are called antigens-anti- being short for antibody, and -gen meaning "producer." (In a similar way, an allergen produces an allergy, and a pathogen produces a pathology or disease.) Antigens are often rodlike structures that stick out from the surface of an invading organism-usually a bacterium or a virus-and allow it to at tach it self to cells in the invaded body. But unfort unately for them, in doing so they let the immune system know they're present , and the body is flooded with an army of Pac-Man-like antibodies.
 
antipathy
   A strong dislike.


E.g.
 It seemed odd thathe could feel such intense antipathy for someone he'd only met once, and we suspected there was more to the st ory.


When the nation of Yugoslavia was created in 1945, it combined a number of ethnic groups with a hist ory of violentantipathy t oward each other. In 1991-92 four regions of the country announced that they would become independent nations; a bloody six-year war followed, fueled by these ancientand powerful antipathies. The American Civil War similarly resulted from antipathy bet ween the North and the South. Butin the U.S.'s relations with it s next -door neighbors, it 's been a long time since emotions have got ten much stronger than annoyance.
 
antithesis
      (1) The contrast or opposition of ideas. (2) The exact opposite.


E.g.
 Life on the small college  campus, with  it s personal freedom and  responsibility, was the antithesis of what many st udent s had known in high school.


Writers and speechmakers use the traditional pat tern known as antithesis for it s resounding effect ; John Kennedy's famous "ask not whatyour country can do for you-ask whatyou can do for your country" is an example. Butantithesis normally means simply "opposite." Thus, war is the antithesis of peace, wealth is the antithesis of poverty, and love is the antithesis of hate. Holding two antithetical ideas in one's head at the same time-for example, thatyou're the sole master of your fate butalso the helpless victim of your terrible upbringing-is so common as to be almost normal.
 
CONTRA is the Latin equivalent of anti-, and it t oo means essentially "against " or "contrary t o." A contrast "stands against " something else thatit 's compared t o. And contrapuntal music, as in the music of Bach, set s one melody againstanother played at the same time and produces harmony (which no one is opposed t o).
 
contraband
      Goods thatare forbidden by law to be owned or broughtinto or out of a country; smuggled goods.


E.g.
 Late at nighthe would go  driving  through  the  desert  on  the  interstate, peddling  his contraband to wary gas-station at tendant s.


In Latin a bannus was  an order or decree, so a contrabannum was something that wentagainsta decree. This led to the Italian word contrabbando, from which we get contraband. Contraband items aren'talways illegal; they may simply be things (such as cigaret tes) thatare meant to be taxed. So a dealer in untaxed contraband can charge a lit t le less and still make enormous profit s. Of course, if the item is actually forbidden, like illegal drugs, then the profit s could be much greater.
 
contraindication
                Something  (such   as  a   sympt om  or condition) that makes a particular treat ment , medication, or procedure likely to be unsafe.


E.g.
 A hist ory of st omach ulcers is a contraindication to regular use of aspirin.


For  doct ors,  an indication  is  a  sympt om or circumstance  that  makes a  particular medical treat ment  desirable. Serious  anxiety, for  example, is  often  an  indication  for  prescribing  a tranquilizer. A contraindication, then, is a sympt om or condition that makes a treat mentrisky, such as taking certain other medications at the same time. Drugs and conditions thatare contraindicated for a medication are listed on it s label, and reeled off athigh speed in TV ads. Patient s can guard against the dangers of drug interaction by reading labels carefully and making sure their doct ors know whatelse they're current ly taking.
 
contravene
    (1) To go against or act contrary t o; to violate. (2) To oppose in an argument , to contradict .


E.g.
 The power  company  was  found to be  contravening  state  and  federal  environmental standards for wastewater discharged into bodies of water.


Contravene is most often used in reference to laws. So a government may take a company to court claiming thatit s policies are in contravention of national labor laws. The contravention of copyright laws is a big t opic t oday especially where electronic information is involved. And a country might  be punished if a trade organization finds that  it 's contravening international trade agreement s.
 
contrarian
     A person who takes a contrary position or at tit ude, especially an invest or who buys shares of st ock when most others are selling or sells when others are buying.


E.g.
 My father was basically a contrarian, who never accepted the common wisdom and loved nothing so much as a good argument .


Anyone who thinks that most of what the public believes is wrong would be called a contrarian. And contrarian is a basic term in the vocabulary of investing. In fact , most successful invest ors often behave like contrarians by "buying low and selling high"-thatis, buying st ocks thatare cheap because mostinvest ors puta low value on them but thathave the possibility of rising, and selling st ocks that mostinvest ors are valuing highly but that seem likely to decline. The word may be most common as an adjective; so you may express a contrarian opinion, hold a contrarian view, or pursue a contrarian invest ment strategy.
 

 
Greek and Latin Borrowings

in memoriam
       In memory of.


E.g.
 The message on the pedestal begins "In memoriam" and then list s the names of the local young men who died in World War I.


Since the days of the Roman empire, the words In memoriam, followed by a name, have been found on monument s and gravest ones. They may also appear in the dedication of a book or poem; Alfred Tennyson's greatest poem is his immense In Memoriam, writ ten over a period of 17 years to mourn the death of his dear friend Arthur Hallam.
 
magnum opus
     A great work, especially the greatestachievement of an artist , composer, or writer.


E.g.
 No one was exact ly sure what the massive novel was about , buteveryone was certain thatit was his magnum opus.


The greatest work of a greatartist may be hard to agree on. Many would pick Rembrandt 's The Night Watch, Mozart 's Don Giovanni, Ovid's Metamorphoses, Dante's Divine Comedy, Wren's St . Paul's Cathedral, and Michelangelo's Sistine Chapel murals. But  for Shakespeare, would it be Hamlet or King LearE.g.
 For Mahler, The Song of the Earth or the Ninth SymphonyE.g.
 For the Marx Brothers, A Day at the Races or A Nightat the OperaE.g.

 
memento mori
 A reminder of mortality, especially a human skull symbolizing death.


E.g.
 The first t winges of arthritis often serve as a vivid memento mori for middle-aged jocks trying to ignore their advancing years.


Memento mori literally means "Remember you  must  die."  The  early  Puritan  set t lers  were particularly aware of death and fearful of whatit might mean, so a Puritan t ombst one will often display a memento mori intended for the living. These death's-heads or skulls may strike us as ghoulish, but they helped keep the living on the straightand narrow for  fear of eternal punishment . In earlier centuries, an educated European might place an actual skull on his desk to keep the idea of death always presentin his mind.
 
habeas corpus
    An order to bring a jailed person before a judge or court to find outif that person should really be in jail.


E.g.
 The country has a primitive legal system with no right of habeas corpus, and suspect s often are shot before they ever see a judge.


The literal meaning of habeas corpus is "You shall have the body"-thatis, the judge musthave the person charged with a crime broughtinto the courtroom to hear whathe's been charged with. Through much of human hist ory, and in many countries still t oday, a person may be imprisoned on the orders of someone in the governmentand kept behind bars for years withoutever get ting a chance to defend himself, or even knowing whathe's done wrong. In England, the right to be brought before a judge to hear the charges and answer them was writ ten into law over 300 years ago, and the  U.S.  adopted  the  British  practice  in  it s Constit ution.
 
rigor mortis
  The temporary rigidity of muscles that set s in after death.


E.g.
 The coroner could tell from the progress of rigor mortis that death had occurred no more than six hours earlier.


Rigor mortis, which translates from Latin as "stiffness of death," set s in quickly and usually ends three or four days after death. The condition result s from a lack of certain chemicals in the muscles; it  may be affected by muscular activity before death as well as the external temperature. Mystery writers frequent ly make use of rigor mortis as a means by which the detective or the examiner can determine the time of the victim's death, which often turns out to be all-importantin solving the case.
 
sine qua non
  An essential thing.


E.g.
 Good planning is the sine qua non of a successful dinner party.


Sine qua non can be translated literally as "Without which, not ." Though this may sound like gibberish, it means more or less "Without (something), (something else) won't be possible." Sine qua non sounds slight ly literary, and it shouldn't be used justanywhere. Butitactually shows up in many context s, including business ("A solid cust omer base is the sine qua non to success"), show business ("A good agentis a sine qua non for an act or's career"), and politics ("His support was really the sine qua non for her candidacy").
 
tabula  rasa
(1)  The  mind  in  it s  blank  or  unmarked  state  before receiving any impressions from out side. (2) Something existing in it s original pure state.


E.g.
 As for knowing what life out side of his lit t le village was like, he was practically a tabula rasa.


In ancientrome, a st udentin class would write on a wax-covered wooden tablet , or tabula, using a sticklike implement . At the end of the day, the marks could be scraped off, leaving a fresh, unmarked tablet -a tabula rasa-for the next day's lessons. Buteven before the Romans, the Greek philosopher Arist ot le had called the mind at birth an "unmarked tablet ." We still use the term t oday, but usually not very seriously; with what we know about biology and genetics, most of us don'treally think there's nothing in a mind at birth.
 
terra incognita
             An unexplored country or field of knowledge.


E.g.
 We've been to Phoenix once, but otherwise Arizona is terra incognita.


When Roman mapmakers drew a land area that no one had yetexplored, they often labeled it "Terra Incognita"-thatis, "Unknown Territ ory"-and the  term  continued to be  used  for centuries afterward. When Columbus and  his  successors  first  crossed  the At lantic, they entered upon terra incognita, a land that came to be called the "New World." But the term is justas useful for mental exploration. For most of us, subject s such as particle physics, French 17th-century drama, and soil mechanics are terra incognita, and we can only hope to live long enough to be able to explore some of them someday.
 

 

 
