 27


NANO SUPER DE NUL/NULL ARM SURG STRAT LATER TOM IATR
Quiz27-1 Quiz27-2 Quiz27-3 Quiz27-4 Quiz27-5 ReviewQuizzes27

NANO comes from the Greek nanos, meaning "dwarf." For a prefix meaning "small," English got by for centuries with the Greek micro-, and later mini- came to be used widely as well. But only recent ly, as a result of advances in scientific knowledge and technology, has there been a need for a prefix meaning "extremely small"-a need that 's been filled by nano-, which t oday is being at tached to all kinds of words, sometimes not very seriously (nanoskirt, nano-brained, et c.).
 
nanotechnology
           The science of  manipulating materials on an at omic or molecular scale, especially to build microscopic devices such as robot s.


E.g.
 Nanotechnology is now seen as contributing to numerous environmental solutions, from cleaning up hazardous waste sites to producing strong but light weight materials for auto bodies.


Nanotechnology, or nanotech for short , deals with mat ter ata level that most of us find hard to imagine, since itinvolves object s with dimensions of 100 billionths of a meter (1/800th of the thickness of a human hair) or less. The chemical and physical properties of materials often change great ly at this scale. Nanotechnology is already being used in aut omobile tires, land- mine detect ors, and computer disk drives. Nanomedicine is a particularly exciting field: Imagine particles the size of a blood cell that could be released into the bloodstream to form into tiny robot s and at tack cancer cells, or "machines" the size of a molecule that could actually repair the damaged interiors of individual cells.
 
nanosecond
    One billionth of a second.


E.g.
 When he finally asked if she would marry him, it t ook her abouta nanosecond to say yes.


The nonserious use of nanosecond is probably much more common than the proper technical use. In measurement terms such as nanosecond, nanogram, and nanometer, nano- means "billionth"; in other kinds of words, it s meaning isn't quite so precise. In computers, the speed of reading and writing to random access memory (RAM) is measured in nanoseconds. By comparison, the speed of reading or writing to a hard drive or a CD-ROM player, or for information to travel over the Internet , is measured in milliseconds (thousandths of a second), which are a million times longer than nanoseconds.
 
nanostructure
  An arrangement , structure, or part of something of molecular dimensions.


E.g.
 In the 1990s the physics depart ment , which had been doing  extensive  research  on microstructures, began to get deeply involved in nanostructures, including nanofoam, nanoflakes, and nanofibers.


Two important types of nanostructure are nanocrystals (tiny crystals, often of semiconducting material) and nanotubes (tiny t ubes, usually of pure carbon). Nanocrystals made from semiconduct ors change color depending on their size, and are being used for such tasks as detecting viruses in living cells. Nanot ubes can conductenormous amount s of  electrical current , far more than metal wires. They are the basic material of tiny "paper" bat teries, which can be rolled, folded, or cut while still producing power. Nanot ubes are also now being used in materials for light weight tennis racket s and golf clubs, and may soon enable the manufacture of TV screens no thicker than a film.
 
nanoparticle
  A tiny particle whose size is measured in billionths of a meter.


E.g.
 Nanoparticles of iron are being used to clean up soil pollution, helping break down molecules of dangerous substances into simple compounds.


Nanoparticles of a material usually have very different qualities from those that the material has atit s ordinary scale, which is one reason why there's such excitement  about  the possibilities for how they might be used in future technologies. Many uses have already been developed. Aluminum nanoparticles added to rocket fuel can make the fuel burn t wice as fastand release much more energy. Silicon nanoparticles are increasing the energy efficiency of solar cells by allowing the energy from ultraviolet light to be captured for the first time. Other nanoparticles are now helping preventrustin metals, produce stronger bat teries, enhance the diagnosis of cancer, and improve the filtering of water, and the number of other applications is growing fast .
 
SUPER, a Latin prefix meaning "over, higher, more than," has become one of the most familiar prefixes in English, one of those prefixes that we use to create new words all the time: supermodel, superpowerful, superjock, supersize, supersweet-the list goes on and on. This all seems to have started in 1903 when the playwright G. B. Shaw translated the German word ¨¹bermensch, Niet zsche's famous term for the person who rises to heroic height s through discipline and creative power, in the tit le of his play Man and Superman. The comic-book character with the same name wouldn't make his appearance for another 30 years.
 
superfluous
      Beyond whatis needed; extra.


E.g.
 My Freshman Comp professor removes all superfluous words from our essays, and usually ends up shortening mine by about 40 percent .


Since the Latin fluere means "to flow" (see FLU), you can think of superfluous as describing a river with so much water thatit 's overflowing it s banks. The word is used in all kinds of context s. Superfluous characters in computer code may keep it from working. Most of the but t ons on a remote control may strike us as superfluous, since we never use them. When a situation "speaks for it self," any comment may be superfluous. And whenever you yourself are feeling superfluous, as in a "Two's company, three's a crowd" situation, it 's probably time to leave.
 
insuperable
   Incapable of being solved or overcome.


E.g.
 In learning to speak again after suffering a massive stroke, he had overcome what seemed like insuperable odds.


From it s root s, the literal meaning of insuperable would be something like "un-get -overable"; insurmountable is a fairly exact synonym. Insuperable is used to describe obstacles, difficulties, barriers, obstructions, problems, and objections. Americans love st ories of people who succeed in spite of terrible handicaps, whether as a result of physical limitations, prejudice, poverty, or lack of opport unity; such rugged spirit s may be called indomitable, "incapable of being subdued."
 
supersede                      To take the place of; to replace with something newer or more useful.


E.g.
 The not orious decision in the Dred Scot t case was superseded by the 14th Amendment to the Constit ution, which stated thatanyone born in the U.S. had all the right s of a citizen.


The Latin word supersedere means "sit on t op of"-which is one way of taking someone else's place. Your boss may send around a memo that supersedes the memo she sent the day before (the one with all the errors in it ). Every time the first -class postage rate goes up, the new stamps supersede the old ones. In science, a new theory often supersedes an older one; for example, the theory thata characteristic you acquire during your lifetime can be passed on biologically to your children (called Lamarckism) was superseded by  Darwin's  theory  of evolution. Watch out  when spelling this word; supersede is practically the only English word thatends in -sede.
 
superlative
    Supreme, excellent .


E.g.
 The new restaurant turned out to be an elegant place, and we all agreed that the food and wine were superlative.


Superlative may sound high-flown when compared with a synonym like outstanding, butif your next paper comes back from your teacher with the comment "Superlative work!" at the t op you probably won't complain. Since superlative means "best , greatest ," it makes sense that superlative is also a term used in grammar for the highest degree of comparison. So for the adjective simple, for example, the comparative form is simpler and the superlative form is simplest; and for the adverb boldly, the comparative form is more boldly and the superlative is most boldly.
 

 
DE in Latin means "down, away." So a descentis a downward slope or climb, and a decline is a downward slide (of health, income, et c.). To devalue something is to take value away from it . And you might describe a depressed friend as "down."
 
debase                   To lower the value or reputation of someone or something.


E.g.
 Every year she complains abouthow Christ mas has been debased by commercialism.


Debase is often used to talk about  someone's  lowered  stat us  or  character. People  are constant ly blustering about the debased tastes of the ordinary American, and especially the debased music of America's youth. A commentat or might observe that both candidates had managed to debase themselves by the end of a political campaign. Debase has a special meaning in economics: From time to time, government s find that they need to quiet ly debase their countries' currency by reducing the percentage of valuable metal in it s coins; if they don't , the metal may become more valuable than the coin and people will begin melting the coins down and reselling the metal.
 
defamation
     The harming of someone's reputation by libel or slander.


E.g.
 In a famous case in 1735, the newspaper publisher J. P. Zenger was found not guilty of defamation because everything he had printed about the plaintiff was true.


Harming someone's reputation in speech with falsehoods is known as slander, and doing the same thing in writing is known as libel (which sometimes includes speech as well). Any ordinary citizen who can claim to have suffered harm as a result of such defamation may sue. So why aren't politicians suing all the timeE.g.
 Because an exception is made for "public persons" (a category thatincludes most  other celebrities as well), who must  also prove that  any such statement  was made with  "reckless disregard  for the  truth." And although, even  by that standard, public persons are defamed all the time, most of them have decided thatit 's bet ter to just grin and bear it .
 
degenerative Causing the body or part of the body to become weaker or less able to function as time passes.


E.g.
 Alzheimer's is a degenerative disease of the brain, marked by the decline of mental and physical abilities.


Degenerative  diseases-including  cancer,  glaucoma,  Parkinson's,  diabetes,  arthritis,  and leprosy-are usually contrasted with infectious diseases (diseases caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi, and prot ozoa). However, many infectious diseases (Lyme disease, AIDS, et c.) can cause a body or body part to degenerate, and infective organisms play a partin some degenerative diseases. Some degenerative diseases can be controlled; some can even be cured. But no one has  yet  discovered  a  way to reverse  such  degenerative  conditions  as  multiple  sclerosis, emphysema, or Alzheimer's.
 
dejection
  Sadness, depression, or lowness of spirit s.


E.g.
 Her friends were puzzled by her frequent periods of dejection, which seemed to occur with no obvious cause.


Based part ly on the Latin iacere, "to throw" (see JECT), dejection means literally "cast down"- thatis, "downcast ." Like melancholy, gloom, and even sadness, dejection seems to have been declining in use for many years; instead, we now seem to prefer depression (whose root s mean basically "a pressing down"). Since depression is also the word used by doct ors, lot s of people now assume thatanyone depressed should be taking an antidepressant ; if we went back to dejected and dejection, we might not be so quick to make thatassumption.
 
NUL/NULL comes from the Latin word nullus, "none," which is it self  a  combination  of ne- ("not ") and ullus ("any"). Have you ever noticed how many of our negative words start with n-E.g.
 Think of no, not, never, nothing, none, no one, nowhere, and the hundreds of non- words-justaboutall of which go back to the same Greek root .
 
null            (1) Having no legal power; invalid. (2) Having no element s.


E.g.
 If we can prove thatyou signed the contract because you were being physically threatened, it will aut omatically be declared null.


Null is used most ly by lawyers, mathematicians, and computer programmers. In law, it usually occurs in the phrase "null and void" (which means about the same thing as null it self). When one of the parties thathas signed a contract doesn'thold up his or her part of the deal-for example, if a contract states thata supplier must supply a million screws of a certain quality of steel, and it turns out the screws supplied were of inferior steel-the other company can refuse to pay anything, claiming the contractis null and void. In mathematics, null means "lacking any element s"; a null setis a set of figures that 's actually empty. In computer programming, a null is a character that doesn'tactually show up as a character, butinstead may just be required to show thata series of digit s or characters is finished.
 
nullity                      (1) Nothingness. (2) A mere nothing.


E.g.
 He couldn't believe she'd actually lefthim for that nullity-a guy with no style, no drive, no personality atall.


Intellectuals may speak of a book or a film as a nullity, claiming it possesses nothing original enough to justify it s existence. Legal scholars also use the word; a law passed by a legislature may be called a nullity if, for example, it 's so obviously unconstit utional thatit 's going to be shot down by the court s in no time. And if you're in an unkind mood, you're also free to call a person a nullity, if you're notinstead calling him a nobody, a nonentity, or a zero.
 
nullify               (1) To cancel legally. (2) To cause something to lose it s value or to have no effect .


E.g.
 In soccer or water polo, a penalty can nullify a goal thathas just been made.


A legislature may nullify a ban, a law, or a tax by simply passing a new law. Election result s can be nullified if a court finds the voting process was improper, and a courtruling can be nullified by a higher court . Even the Supreme Courtit self may have it s decisions nullified by new laws passed by the Congress-though notif a decision is based on the Constit ution. In the years leading up to the American Civil War, Southern states claimed the right to nullify any federal law (such as antislavery laws) that they believed to be unconstit utional, leading to the Nullification Crisis of 1832. Annul is a close synonym of nullify (with the same root ), as are abrogate and invalidate.
 
annulment
  An official statement that something is no longer valid.


E.g.
 He requested an annulment of the marriage from the Church, buthis wife claimed that , after 15 years and two children, the idea of annulment was ridiculous.


Annulment usually applies to marriage. In some states an annulment may be carried out by a court ("judicial annulment "), butannulmentis generally practiced by a church ("ecclesiastic annulment "), and principally the Roman Catholic Church, which traditionally hasn't  permit ted divorce. The usual acceptable reason for annulmentis a "failure to consummate" the marriage by having children. Unlike a marriage thatends in divorce, an annulled marriage is considered never to have existed. Other things can be annulled as well, including a contract (if one party fails to comply with it s terms) or an election (if it wasn't carried out properly).
 

 
ARM comes from the Latin arma, meaning "weapons, t ools." The rootis seen in such English words as arms (i.e., weapons), armed, and army. Ithas nothing to do with the limb that start s atyour shoulder; the name for that kind of arm comes from the Latin word meaning "shoulder."
 
armada                          A large group of warships or boat s.


E.g.
 The U.S. Navy hopes to build an electric armada, a new generation of ships driven by electric power.


A Spanish word that originally meant simply "armed," armada is now used in Spanish-speaking nations as the name of their national  navies. In  English, the  word  usually  has  hist orical overt ones. The Greatarmada of 1588 was a 120-ship fleet  sent by Philip  I of Spain in an at tempt to invade Elizabethan England; it was defeated when British forces liteight ships afire and sent them sailing into the Armada's midst , then blocked the passage to the south so that  the remaining ships were forced to sail northward around Britain in order to return home, causing dozens more ships to be wrecked in the st ormy northern seas. Today we sometimes use the word humorously for fleet s of fishing boat s, rowboat s, or canoes.
 
armistice
  An agreement to st op fighting a war; a truce.


E.g.
 Ambassadors from three neighboring countries were trying to arrange an armistice bet ween the warring forces.


Justas the solstice is the time of year when the sun (Latin, sol) "stands still," an armistice is an agreement for armies to st op where they are and lay down their arms. The word is associated with the truce that marked the end of World War I on the Western Front , where the Allies had confronted Germany, in 1918. The day of the ceasefire, November 11th ("the eleventh day of the eleventh month"), was for many years called Armistice Day; t oday it 's known as Veterans Day in the U.S. and as Remembrance Day in Canada and Australia.
 
armory                    A place where weapons are made or st ored.


E.g.
 The great military rifles known as the Springfield 30.06 and the M1 were developed at the Springfield Armory in Massachuset t s.


An armory has traditionally been a military st orage compound where machine guns, rifles, pist ols, ammunition, part s, and accessories are kept . In the U.S., National Guard and Reserve unit s often use armories as training headquarters in peacetime. Ever since George Washingt on established the country's firstarmory in Springfield in 1777, arsenals and armories of the Army Ordnance Corps have had a remarkable hist ory of arms manufacture.
 
disarming
Tending to remove any feelings of unfriendliness or distrust .


E.g.
 All of  us at the meeting were charmed by the new manager's disarming openness and modesty.


A defeated country is sometimes forced to disarm (give up it s weapons), and research may be aimed at disarming a deadly virus (making itincapable of doing damage). But the meaning of the adjective disarming isn't quite so physical. If you say your nephew has a disarming smile, you mean thathis smile's warmth and genuineness disarm the people he meet s  of  any possible suspicion or criticism and of any verbal weapons they mighthave used againsthim.
 
SURG comes from the Latin verb surgere, meaning "to rise, spring up." Our noun surge means "a sudden, large increase," and the verb surge means "to move with a surge." A storm surge occurs when violent st orm winds at sea cause the water to pile up higher than normal sea level. A surge protector keeps a spike in electrical current from "frying" your computer when a light ning strike sends a sudden surge down the wires.
 
upsurge                      A rapid or sudden increase or rise.


E.g.
 Almost forgot ten for years, at 76 he was offered a colorful role in an odd lit t le film, which broughtan upsurge in interestin his career.


An upsurge in drug use sometimes leads to an upsurge in crime. An upsurge of flu cases can be cause for alarm. And an upsurge of fury at overpaid CEOs might lead to new legislation to restrain high salaries. We seem to use upsurge more in negative context s than in positive ones, but notalways; we usually welcome an upsurge of consumer confidence, an upsurge in new-car sales, or an upsurge in the st ock market .
 
insurgency                      A usually violentat tempt to take control of a government ; a rebellion or uprising.


E.g.
 The Mexican press was fascinated by the armed insurgency's mysterious leader, who wore a mask and went by the name of Subcomandante Marcos.


Insurgencies fall into the category of "irregular warfare," since an insurgency normally lacks the organization of a revolution, even though ithas the same aims. Revolutions often begin within a country's armed forces, whereas insurgencies often arise in remote areas, where they gain strength slowly by winning the confidence of rural populations. An insurgency may be based on ethnic or religious identity, or it s root s may be basically political or economic. Since insurgencies are rarely strong enough to face a national army head-on, insurgents (often called guerrillas) tend to use such tactics as bombing, kidnapping, hostage taking, and hijacking.
 
counterinsurgent
      A person  taking  military  or political action against guerrillas or revolutionaries.


E.g.
 Counterinsurgent s who build trust with the local population will gradually begin to receive useful information.


A counterinsurgentis, as you might guess, someone who combat s an insurgency. Counterinsurgency effort s often at tempt to win the "heart s and minds" of a population by hiring and paying local villagers, opening health clinics and schools, organizing sport s programs, and providing agricultural assistance. These terms were first used to describe the American effort to strengthen the South Viet namese governmentagainst communist forces in the 1960s-an effort thateventually ended in defeat .
 
resurgent                           Rising again into life, activity, or prominence.


E.g.
 The country had let down it s guard over the summer, and in the fall a resurgent flu virus overwhelmed the public-health system, killing tens of thousands.


Resurgent means literally a "rising again"  (see RE). We may speak of a resurgent  baseball team, a resurgent steel industry, the resurgence of jogging, or a resurgence of violence in a war z one. Resurgence is particularly prominentin it s Italian translation, risorgimento. In the 19th century, when the Italian peninsula consisted of  a number of small independent states, a popular movement known as the Risorgimento managed to unify the peninsula and create the modern state of Italy in 1870.
 

 
STRAT comes from the Latin word stratum, meaning "spread" or "bed." Strata, a form of the same word, came to be used by the Romans to mean "paved road"-thatis, street.
 
strat um                   (1) A layer of a substance, especially one of a series of layers. (2) A level of society made up of people of the same rank or position.


E.g.
 Alcohol and drug abuse are found in every strat um of society.


In geology, a strat um is a layer of rock or soil thatis distinct from those above and below it . Rock and soil strata (notice the plural form) can be seen in road cut s, cliffs, quarries, riverbanks, and sand dunes, and in  pieces  of  limest one, slate, and  shale. Archaeologist s  digging  in hist orical sites are careful to note the strat um where each artifactis found. Earth scientist s divide the earth's at mosphere into strata, justas oceanographers divide the ocean's depths into strata. And for social scientist s, a strat um is a group of people who are similar in some way, such as education, culture, or income.
 
stratification
      The process or state of being formed, deposited, or arranged in layers.


E.g.
 The stratification of the lake in summer keeps oxygen-rich cold water at the bot t om, where coldwater fish such as trout take refuge.


If you look for it , you'll find stratification almosteverywhere. On a tall rain-forest tree, there may be differentair plant s clinging to it , differentinsect s crawling on it , and different mammals making their homes at different levels. The earth beneath you may be stratified into several distinctive layers within the first 20 feet . If the wind you're feeling is moving at 10 miles per hour, at 30 feetabove your head it may be 20 mph, and in the jet stream above thatit may be 150 mph. If you climb a high mountain in Himalayas, you may begin in a lush, wet forestand end up in a windsweptenvironment where noteven lichen will grow.
 
substrate                           (1) An underlying layer. (2) The base on which an organism lives.


E.g.
 The soil is the substrate of most seed plant s.


With it s Latin prefix sub-, "below" (see SUB) , substrate obviously refers to a  layer  under something else. Rock may serve as the substrate for the coral in a coral reef. Tiny wafers of silicon (or another semiconduct or) serve as the substrate for computer chips. Substrate may also mean subsoil-thatis, the layer under the t opsoil, lacking in organic mat ter or humus. Substrate is part of the vocabulary of various other sciences, including chemistry and biology. Butalthough it 's most ly a scientific term, writers may also use it to mean simply "foundation"- for instance, when observing thatreading is the substrate on which most other learning is based.
 
strat ocumulus
               A  low-lying  cloud  formation  appearing  as extensive and often dark horizontal layers, with t ops rounded into large balls or rolls.


E.g.
 A dark bank of strat ocumulus clouds was moving in quickly, and in March that usually meant bad weather.


When a cloud type forms a broad "layer" over the earth, the strat- root shows up in it s scientific name. The type called simply stratus forms a low layer of gray extending over a large area. Cirrostratus ("curl layer") clouds form a  high, thin layer often  covering  the  entire  sky (but without the wispy curls of ice crystals that give pure cirrus clouds their name). Altostratus ("high layer") clouds form a darkish gray mid-altit ude layer. Nimbostratus ("rainst orm layer") clouds form a low, dark layer of gray cloud that usually produces light but continuous rain, snow, or sleet (but not violent st orms of the kind that give pure nimbus clouds their name). Cumulus ("heap") is the familiar puffy fair-weather type of cloud; strat ocumulus is it s more wintry version, which spreads outin a fairly flat layer, much less "heaped up," and sometimes dense enough to cover almost the whole sky.
 
LATER comes from the Latin adjective lateralis, meaning "side." The noun for "side" in Latin w a s latus, and the same word  served  as  an  adjective  meaning  "wide."  The  relationship bet ween the two isn'thard to spot , since something wide extends far out to it s sides. So lines of latitude extend east -westaround the earth, in the dimension we tend to think of as it s width (unlike lines of longitude, which extend north-south, in the dimension that , for some reason, we decided to think of as it s "length").
 
lateral                      Of or relating to the side.


E.g.
 Only in the lateral views did the X-rays reveal an suspicious-looking shadow on the lung.


Lateral shows up in all kinds of context s. A lateral job change is one that keeps you atabout  the same job level and salary. A coach mighthave special drills to improve his players' lateral speed and agility. The British speak of "lateral thinking," thinking that grabs ideas that may not seem to be relevant but turn out to work well-what we might call "thinking out side the box." But we know lateral best from foot ball. A lateral pass is a pass of the ball bet ween teammates that usually goes to the side and slight ly backward from the direction in which they're advancing; unlike a forward pass, a lateral may be made from any position, and any number may be made in a single play.
 
bilateral                           Involving two groups or countries.


E.g.
 Instead of working on a set of separate bilateral trade agreement s, they propose bringing the countries of the region t ogether to sign a single jointagreement .


Since the prefix bi- means "t wo" in Latin (see BI/BIN), bilateral means essentially "t wo-sided." In the days when there were two superpowers, the U.S. and the Soviet Union regularly engaged in bilateral arms negotiations; such negotiations are much less common t oday. Sometimes bilateral refers to two sides of the same thing. A bilateral hip replacement , for instance, replaces both hip bones in the same operation. And bilateral symmetry (a term often used by biologist s) refers to the fact that , in many organisms (such as humans), the left side is basically the mirror image of the right side.
 
collateral
 (1) Associated but of secondary importance. (2) Related but notin a direct or close way.


E.g.
 Though the army referred to the civilian deaths as "collateral damage," since civilians weren't the intended target s, the incidentaroused intense anger among the survivors.


If an official talking about some policy refers to a collateral issue, he or she means something that may be affected butisn't central to the discussion. To an anthropologist , your cousin would be called a collateral relative, since he or she (unlike your grandmother, brother, or daughter) is "off to the side" of your direct line of  descent . As  a  noun, collateral  means something provided to a lender as a guarantee of repayment . So if you take outa loan or mort gage to buy a car or house, the loan agreement usually states that the car or house is collateral that goes to the lender if the sum isn't paid.
 
equilateral
   Having all sides or faces equal.


E.g.
 On her desk she keptan equilateral prism, through which every morning the sun would project the colors of the spectrum onto the far wall.


Since equi- means "equal" (see EQU), the meaning of equilateral is easy to guess from it s root s. The word is most ly used in geometry. The standard polygons (many-sided geometrical shapes)-the pentagon, hexagon, octagon, et c.-are assumed to be equilateral if we don't say otherwise; an equilateral rectangle has the special name square. But triangles are particularly important , and many triangles are notequal-sided. The standard polyhedrons (many-sided solids) are also equilateral. Most  common is the cube, all of whose sides are square. The tetrahedron has four triangular sides and thus is a pyramid with a triangular base, unlike the pyramids of Egypt with their square bases.
 

 
TOM comes from the Greek root meaning "cut ." Thus, the Latin word anatomia, from which we getanatomy, means "dissection"-thatis cut ting or separating the part s of an organism for detailed examination. In a lobotomy, the nerves linking a brain lobe to the rest of the brain are removed; even though lobot omies have hardly been performed in the last 50 years, the idea can still fill us with horror.
 
appendect omy
         Surgical removal of the human appendix.


E.g.
 Appendect omy is an emergency procedure, since appendicitis can be fatal if it s sympt oms are ignored.


Th e appendix is a tiny t ube at tached to the large intestine that no longer has any real function. Appendicitis-inflammation and swelling of the  appendix, usually  as  a  result  of bacterial infection-generally occurs bet ween the ages of 10 and 19, and is the most common reason for  emergency surgery in the U.S. t oday. Since the appendix has so lit t le to do, appendect omies normally have no negative aftereffect s  at  all. If  appendicitis  is  ignored, bacteria may enter the blood and infect other part s of the body.
 
gastrect omy
   Surgical removal of all or part of the st omach.


E.g.
 Gastrect omy is used to treatholes in the st omach wall, noncancerous t umors, and cancer, butis performed only when other treat ment s have been rejected.


Gastr- comes from the Greek word for "belly," and shows up in English in such words as gastric ("relating to the st omach") and gastronomy ("the cooking and eating of fine food"). Believe it or not , there are many people t oday who have had a gastrect omy and live withouta st omach; some of them need to eat fairly steadily and carefully through the day, but many lead almost completely normal and even vigorous lives.
 
t onsillect omy
        Surgical removal of the t onsils.


E.g.
 His daughter's usual doct or thoughtantibiotics could cure her swollen t onsils, buta specialistrecommended t onsillect omy.


The t onsils are the areas of tissue thatyou can see in the mirror on both sides of your throat (not to be confused with the uvula, which hangs down in the middle). Tonsillect omy, the most common surgery performed on children in the U.S., is intended to relieve tonsillitis, or inflammation of the t onsils (usually by strep or staph bacteria). But the factis, t onsillitis can often be successfully treated with antibiotics, which means that surgery, including the week or two of pain and discomfort that follows it , is generally unnecessary.
 
mastect omy
   Surgical removal of all or part of the breast .


E.g.
 She has always dreaded being disfigured by mastect omy, buther talks with the surgeon have calmed her considerably.


Breast cancer is the most common cancer among American women. Early cases can often be treated with drugs or with a small operation called a lumpectomy (because itremoves a lump). Though a "simple mastect omy" is larger than a lumpect omy, itallows  the  breast to be reconstructed, using artificial implant s or tissue from elsewhere on the  body. But  "radical mastect omy," which is required when the cancer is atan advanced stage, takes much of the chest muscle and makes reconstruction impossible.
 
IATR, from the Greek iatros, "healer, physician," usually hides in the middle of words, where itisn'timmediately noticed. A pediatrician treat s children (see PED-). A psychiatristis a physician who treat s mental problems. (A psychologist , by contrast , doesn'thave a medical degree and thus can't prescribe drugs.) And a physiatristis a doct or who practices "physical medicine and rehabilitation," which may involve such things as testing various physical abilities, relieving pain through electric heat or massage, or training patient s to exercise or to use an artificial limb.
 
iatrogenic
     Caused accidentally by medical treat ment .


E.g.
 Most medical malpractice suit s seek compensation for iatrogenic injury.


In the 21st century, patient s with throatinfections are no longer being bled to death by misguided doct ors, like the unfort unate George Washingt on. Butiatrogenic injury and death still remain serious risks. Because of a doct or's bad handwriting, a patient may be given the wrong powerful drug. The sheer number of drugs on the markethas led to dangerous drug interactions, which often occur when one doct or doesn't know whatanother is doing. Too many patient s go to the hospital for some common treat mentand pick up an antibiotic- resistant staph infection. And let 's noteven think about those unlucky patient s who wake up to find that the surgeon has removed the wrong foot .
 
bariatric
   Relating to or specializing in the treat ment of obesity.


E.g.
 In the type of bariatric surgery called gastric bypass, part of the st omach is actually stapled off.


Baros means "weight " in Greek; so, for example, a barometer is an instrument that measures air pressure or weight . Bariatric describes the medical treat ment of serious overweight -thatis, obesity. Bariatric surgery is only employed when other methods of weight loss have been tried and failed. Though stapling the st omach may seem extreme, we now know that obesity great ly increases the risk of heart disease, diabetes, cancer, and stroke, so st omach surgery doesn't justhelp people look and feel bet ter-it 's a potential lifesaver.
 
geriatric
 Of or relating to old people.


E.g.
 We guessed we were now in the hospital's geriatric wing, since all the patient s seemed to be elderly.


Since most medical care is devoted to those over 65, geriatrics, the medical treat ment of the elderly, is a highly important specialty. The specific problems of the elderly include physical inactivity and instability, which result from weakness and loss of energy. Weakness of the eyes and ears plays a role, and weakening of the immune system often leads to more disease. All these conditions can be made worse by mental problems, such as declining intellectual activity, declining memory, and depression, which may prevent the patient from taking action to improve his or her condition. But the effect s of aging can be great ly relieved by proper care. And the greatestimprovement often result s when the patientis persuaded to become more physically, mentally, and socially active.
 
podiatrist
   A doct or who treat s injuries and diseases of the foot .


E.g.
 Like most podiatrist s, she spends a lot of time dealing with minor complaint s like bunions, ankle sprains, arch pain, and hammert oes.


Most foot problems result from the fact thathuman feet were never designed to walk on asphaltand concrete or even to wear shoes (all that cushioning we demand in our shoes may be doing us more harm than good). So t oday we have an entire medical specialty devoted to feet . In the U.S., a podiatristis a doct or of podiatric medicine (D.P.M.), who is licensed to perform surgery. The root pod- comes from the Greek word for "foot " (compare PED). Butin England a foot doct or is often called a chiropodist, a term that dates from the time when the same specialist treated hands as well, since chiro- means "hand."
 

 

 
