 16


TOP CENTR/CENTER DOM OMNI HOL/HOLO RETRO TEMPOR CHRON TRI NumberWords
Quiz16-1 Quiz16-2 Quiz16-3 Quiz16-4 Quiz16-5 ReviewQuizzes16

TOP comes from topos, the Greek word for "place." A topic is a subjectrather than a place; to the Greeks, the original word meant more or less "about one place or subject (rather than another)"-which just goes to show thatit 's notalways easy to trace a word's meaning from it s root s.
 
t opical             (1) Designed for local application to or treat ment of a bodily part . (2) Referring to the t opics of the day.


E.g.
 If the t opical oint ment doesn't work on the rash, the doct or will prescribe an antibiotic pill.


Like a t opical medicine, a t opical reference or st ory applies to something specific, focusing on a topic that 's current ly in the news. TV comedians often use t opical humor, making jokes abouta current ly popular movie or the latest political scandal-if possible, one that just broke that same day. Topical humor has a short lifespan, though, because the news keeps changing and  the new hot t opics just keep coming. The medical meaning of topical stays closer to the meaning of the root , since it describes something that 's putright on the place that seems to need it .
 
ect opic                         Occurring or originating in an abnormal place.


E.g.
 A pacemaker was installed to correcther ect opic heart beat .


Ectopic is a medical word that means basically "out of place." An ect opic kidney is located in an abnormal position. In patient s with an ect opic heart beat , the electrical signals that trigger the heart muscles originate in an abnormal area of the heart . Butectopic most commonly describes a pregnancy in which the fertilized egg begins to develop in an area out side the uterus, such as in a fallopian t ube; such pregnancies may lead to serious problems if  not treated.
 
ut opian                         Relating to an imaginary place in which the government , laws, and social conditions are perfect .


E.g.
 Some of the new mayor's supporters had got ten increasingly unrealistic, and seemed to expect that she could turn the city into a ut opian community.


In 1516 Thomas More published Utopia, a description of a fictional island in the At lantic with an ideal society, in order to draw a sharp contrast with the disorderly political situation of his own time. He created the name from topos ("place") and ou, Greek for "no," since he was well aware that nowhere so perfect was likely to exist on earth. People have long dreamed of creating ut opian communities; some of them have joined communes, societies where other idealist s like themselves have chosen to live in a cooperative way according to certain principles. Not just communes but plans of all kinds have been labeled ut opian by critics. But we can dream, can't weE.g.

 
t opography
    (1) The art of showing the natural and man-made features of a region on a map or chart . (2) The features of a surface, including both natural and man-made features.


E.g.
 Planning the expedition involved careful st udy of the region's t opography.


Topography combines top- with graph-, a root meaning "write" or "describe." The t opography of the Sahara Desert features shifting sand dunes and dry, rocky mountains. A topographic (or topo) map not only shows the surface features of a region butalso indicates the cont ours and approximate altit ude of every location, by means of numerous curving lines, each indicating a single elevation. In other words, it shows a "three-dimensional" picture on a t wo-dimensional surface. Topo maps are commonly used by hikers, surveyors, government workers, and engineers, among other people.
 
CENTR/CENTER comes from the Greek kentron and the Latin centrum, meaning "sharp point " or "center point of a circle." A centrifuge is a spinning machine that throws things out ward from the center; the apparent force that pushes them out ward is called centrifugal force.
 
eccentric                           (1)  Not  following  an  established  or  usual style  or  conduct . (2) Straying from a circular path; off-center.


E.g.
 She keeps a dozen stray cat s in her house and is rather eccentric, buther neighbors say she's very pleasantand completely harmless.


An eccentric wheel spins unevenly, and an eccentric person is similarly a lit t le off-center. Mosteccentricities are inoffensive to others, and some may even do some good. For instance, riding a bicycle to work might be considered eccentric by some people, butit 's good exercise and it cut s down on pollution. Some eccentrics are justahead of their time.
 
epicenter
    (1) The location on the earth's surface direct ly above the focus of an earthquake. (2) The center or focus of activity.


E.g.
 The destruction caused by Mexico City's earthquake was extensive because the city was at the quake's epicenter.


The meaning of epi- in epicenter is "over," so the epicenter of an earthquake lies over the center or "focus" of the quake. Epicenter can also refer to the centers of things that may seem in their own way as powerful-though notas destructive-as earthquakes. Wall Street , for example, might be said to lie at the epicenter of the financial world.
 
egocentric
Overly concerned with oneself; self-centered.


E.g.
 He's brilliant but completely egocentric, and the only things he'll talk aboutare his own life and work.


Ego means "I" in Latin. To an egocentric person, I is the mostimportant word in the language. Greatartist s and writers are often egocentrics; such people can be hard to live with, though their egocentricity, an unfort unate side effect of their talent , is often forgiven. But ordinary egocentricity, which shows up as selfishness, lack of sympathy, and lack of interestin other people, usually has lit t le to do with any personal talent or success.
 
ethnocentric
    Marked by or based on the at tit ude that  one's own group is superior to others.


E.g.
 Some reviewers criticized the ethnocentric bias that came  through  in  the  way the  film portrayed immigrant s.


The Greek word ethnos means "nation" or "people." So ethnocentricity shows it self in a lack of respect for other ways of life, and an ethnocentric person feels thathis or her own nation or group is the cultural center of the world. Ethnocentric describes the kind of person  who behaves badly when traveling in foreign countries, often called an "Ugly American" (from a book and movie of the same name). Whenever you hear someone making fun of the way a foreigner speaks English, justremember thatit 's the foreigner, not the person laughing athim, who actually can speak a foreign language.
 

 
DOM comes from the Latin domus, "house," and dominus, "master," and the two are indeed related. In the Bible, King Ahasuerus, angered by his queen's disobedience, proclaims that "every man is to be master of his own house," and in the Roman empire no one doubted that this was how it was meant to be. A domain is the area where a person has authority or is dominant-but we no longer think of a house as the domain of a single dominant member of a family.
 
dominion
   (1) An area over which one rules; domain. (2) Supreme authority.


E.g.
 The Roman empire had dominion over the entire Mediterranean, which the Romans called
mare nostrum, "our sea."


The ruler of a region has dominion over it , and the area it self may be called the ruler's dominion. In the days of the British Empire, England had dominion over many countries throughout the world. Though Canada has been quite independent of Great Britain since the 19th century, it was generally referred to as the Dominion of Canada in official document s until at least the 1950s. The word has an old-fashioned sound t oday, and probably shows up in hist ory books, hist orical novels, and fantasy video games more often than in discussions of modern nations.
 
predominant
      Greater in importance, strength, influence, or authority.


E.g.
 The predominant color of the desert landscape was a rusty brown.


Something predominant stands outabove all the rest . The predominant theme in an essay is the one that predominates-the main idea that the writer want s to express. (Notice the difference bet ween the adjective and the verb; be sure not to spell the adjective with an -ate ending.) The word is widely used in many fields. For example, the predominant language of Swit zerland is German; the predominant cause of obesity in children is a bad diet ; and your predominantreason for wanting a larger vocabulary may be to simply be a bet ter-educated person-though the positive effect s of a large vocabulary on one's romantic life are well known.
 
domineering
      Tending to control the behavior of others in a bossy manner.


E.g.
 His mother was a domineering type, and noteven his stepfather dared do anything withouther permission.


To be domineering is to behave like a lord. (The word lordly doesn'texpress quite the same thing.) Someone who tells you whatyou can wear or what friends you can spend time with could be called domineering; so could someone who always decides whatyou're going to do with your free time. Those of us who grow up with a domineering parent usually flee as soon as we're old enough.
 
domination                           (1) Supremacy or power over another. (2) The exercise of governing or controlling influence.


E.g.
 The region was under the domination of a single nation, even though ithadn'tyetinvaded it s neighbors.


Domination may sound like something that 's achieved by military force. The t otal domination of Europe, for example, has never been achieved: The Roman empire could never fully dominate the northern Germanic tribes; Napoleon couldn't conquer Spain; and although Adolf Hit ler was briefly dominant over most of the continent , he never managed to overpower England. But the word's earliestappearances don't necessarily involve physical force; Chaucer, for instance, speaks of a mind's domination by strong drink. So we may observe thata great tennis player has continued his domination of the world's court s this season, or that the domination of popular music by rock and roll was obvious by the end of the 1950s.
 
OMNI comes from the Latin word omnis, meaning "all." So in English words, omni- can mean "in all ways," "in all places," or "without limit s." An omnidirectional antenna, for example, is one thatreceives or sends radio waves equally well in all directions. And Omni by it self has been used repeatedly as a brand name for things as differentas a hotel chain and a science magazine.
 
omnivore
An animal thateat s both plant s and other animals.


E.g.
 If we're all natural omnivores, she keptasking herself, then why wouldn'ther t oddler eatanything but cashews and peanut but ter until the age of fourE.g.



Human beings seem to be classic omnivores. Originally living as "hunter-gatherers," we hunted and fished when possible butalso gathered nut s, berries, fruit s, seeds, and root s for much of our diet . We're physically well suited for both tasks; our hands are perfect for picking things, and our build is ideal for running down even the fastest game animals because of our great stamina. Some 10,000 years ago humans began practicing agriculture involving both animals and plant s. The other omnivorous mammals include chimpanzees, pigs, opossums, porcupines, bears, raccoons, skunks, chipmunks, mice and rat s, and skunks. Buteven many mammals classed as carnivorous (see VOR) turn out to be capable of shifting to plant foods when necessary.
 
omnipotent
 Having complete or unlimited power; all-powerful.


E.g.
 Whatreally scares these men is the night mare of an omnipotent state, and they think that with their guns they'll be able to keep the government 's forces at bay when the time comes.


If you know that potens means "power" in Latin (see POT), it 's nothard to guess the meaning o f omnipotent. In Christian services and prayers, the Latin omnipotens is translated as "almighty" and always applied to God. But omnipotence in a government or ruler is naturally a bit scary; as a British lord observed a century ago, "Power tends to corrupt , and absolute power corrupt s absolutely." So democracies do their best to make omnipotence impossible.
 
omnibus
Of or including many things.


E.g.
 Eager to go home for vacation, Senate leaders assembled an omnibus bill to tie up the loose ends on dozens of unrelated project s.


In Latin, omnibus means "for all." So an omnibus bill in Congress packages several measures t ogether, an omnibus survey may poll the public on a wide range of issues, and an omnibus edition of a writer's st ories may bring t ogether justaboutall of them. As a noun, omnibus used to mean a large vehicle for public transportation-thatis, "for all" who could pay the fare-butaround 1900 the word began to be shortened to simply bus.
 
omniscient                   Knowing   everything;  having   unlimited   understanding   or knowledge.


E.g.
 Brought up in a strict Christian family, he knew thatan omniscient God was watching him every second of his life.


Omniscience is something thata t otalitarian state may try to achieve by means of informers, cameras, and monit oring of electronic communication. If your English teacher tells you thata novel has an "omniscient narrat or,'' she means that the voice telling the st ory isn't one of the characters butinstead knows whateach of them is doing and thinking, with the point of view constant ly shifting from one to another.
 

 
HOL/HOLO, meaning "whole," comes from the Greek word holos, with the same meaning. The root can be found in catholic. When capitalized, Catholic refers to the worldwide Christian church based in Rome, which  was  once  the  "whole"-that  is, the  only-Christian  church. Without the capital let ter, catholic means simply "universal" or, when describing a person, "broad in one's interest s or tastes."
 
holistic                        Relating to or concerned with wholes or with complete systems rather than with the analysis of, treat ment of, or dissection into part s.


E.g.
 Environmental scientist s tend to be holistic in their views, even when they're only st udying a tiny patch of ground.


"The whole is greater than the sum of it s part s" expresses the essence of holism, a term coined by the great South African general and statesman Jan Smut s in 1926. Holism generally opposes the Western tendency t oward analysis, the breaking down of wholes  into part s sometimes to the point that "you can't see the forest for the trees." Holism is an important conceptin the sciences and social sciences, and especially in medicine. Holistic medicine tries to treat the "whole person" rather than focusing t oo narrowly on single sympt oms. Itemphasizes the connections bet ween the mind and the body, avoids the overuse of drugs, and has borrowed such practices from Eastern traditions as acupuncture and yoga.
 
hologram
    A  three-dimensional  image  reproduced  from  a  pat tern  of interference produced by a beam of radiation such as a laser.


E.g.
 When holograms are used for data st orage, the entire bulk of the st orage material can be used rather than justit s surface.


A hologram is a picture of a "whole" object , showing itin three dimensions. We've all seen cheap holographic images on credit cards and ID cards (where they help prevent copying). Far more impressive are large holograms that take the form of a ghost ly 3-D moving figure thatyou can walk around to see from all angles. Holograms were invented in  1947  but  only perfected after the invention of the laser in 1960. Today they're used in such technologies as compact -disc players and checkout scanners, and holograms can be created of the inside of live  internal  organs to permit  doct ors to examine  the  organs  in  great  detail. And  soon televisions with hologram technology may enable us to watch in "3-D."
 
Holocene
Of, relating t o, or being the present geologic epoch.


E.g.
 As the Holocene epoch began, the glaciers were swift ly retreating, forest s were taking over the bare land, and human beings were moving northward again in large numbers.


To geologist s, we live t oday in the Holocene epoch, the period that began about 10,000 years ago, at the end of the lastice age, when humans first began practicing agriculture. But what does Holocene have to do with "whole"E.g.
 Well, in geological language, the Holocene epoch follows the Paleocene ("remotely recent "), the Eocene ("early recent "), the Oligocene ("scarcely recent "), the Miocene ("less recent "), the Pliocene ("more recent "), and the Pleistocene ("mostrecent ") epochs-so the Holocene is the "wholly recent " period of geological time.
 
holocaust                          (1) (usually capitalized) The mass slaughter of European civilians and especially Jews by the Nazis during World War I. (2) A thorough destruction involving extensive loss of life, especially through fire.


E.g.
 Her parent s had escaped the Holocaustin Poland by fleeing into the forestand surviving there with hundreds of others for two years.


The Greek word holokaustos means "burnt whole." For the early Jews who followed the laws given in the first books of the Bible, a holocaust was a sacrifice to God, the burning on an altar of a lamb, goat , or young bull. The word is used about 200 times in the traditional Greek version of the Old Testament , though itrarely appears in English translations. In the 1700s holocaust began to be used to refer to the mass destruction of life. But no mass murder in Western hist ory ever approached the scale achieved by the Nazis. As many as 6 million Jews may have died at their hands; when the slaughter of non-Jews is included, the number of murdered victims may have amounted to over 15 million.
 
RETRO means "back," "backward," or "behind" in Latin. Retro in English is generally a prefix, buthas also become a word in it s own right , usually used to describe old styles or fashions.
 
retroactive
    Intended to apply or take effectata date in the past .


E.g.
 The fact that the tax hike was retroactive annoyed the public the most .


We normally think of time as constant ly moving forward. Since retroactive seems to defy time's forward movement , retroactive taxes, laws, and regulations are often seen as particularly obnoxious and  unfair.  (See  also ex post facto.)  But  nobody  ever  object s to receiving  a retroactive raise at work. When we judge hist orical people and event s in terms of present -day morality and at tit udes, our retroactive judgment s may indicate that we're t oo impressed with ourselves and ignorant of hist ory.
 
retrofit                      To furnish something with new or modified part s or equipment that was optional or unavailable at the time of manufacture.


E.g.
 The office building has been retrofit ted with air-conditioning, but the resulthas been a mixed success.


The concept of retrofit ting became an urgent necessity during World War  I, when weapons technology was advancing atan intense pace and planes and ships were becoming out dated even before their construction was complete, and the only solution was to retrofit  the completed craft with the brand-new technology. Retrofit ting was revived on a massive scale during the energy crisis of the 1970s, when new features were added to millions of old houses to make them more energy-efficient . Retrofit ting is thus different from merely renovating, which may notinvolve any new technology atall.
 
retrogress
  To return to an earlier and usually worse or more primitive state.


E.g.
 According to the test s, the sophomores had actually retrogressed in the course of spring term.


As you might guess, retrogress is the opposite of progress. Retrogression is usually an undesirable decline from a higher or advanced level. So, for instance, in difficult social situations an adolescent can retrogress to a childish level of maturity. And under the extreme conditions of t otal war, a whole society may retrogress to a primitive state. The increasing number of poor or homeless people has been seen as evidence of modern social retrogression, and the rise of loud, name-calling TV and  radio  personalities  strikes  many  people  as  a  sign  of  political retrogression.
 
retrospective
  A generally comprehensive  exhibition  or performance usually covering an artist 's out put to date.


E.g.
 A retrospective covering the phot ographer's entire career is forcing critics to revise their earlier estimates of her stat us as an artist .


Retrospective is part ly rooted in the Latin verb specere, "to look," so a retrospective is a look back atan artist 's career. The subject of a retrospective is usually an older living artist , or one who has recent ly died. Galleries and museums honor painters and sculpt ors, film festivals honor direct ors and act ors, and concert organizations honor composers. Retrospectives can be difficultand expensive to assemble, so they're rarely put t ogether except  for deserving artist s; the resultis that they frequent ly win many new fans for the person's achievement .
 

 
TEMPOR comes from the Latin tempus, meaning "time." A temporary repair is meant to last only a short time. The tempo, or speed, of a country-and-western ballad is usually different from that of a hip-hop number. The Latin phrase Tempus fugit means "Time flies,"  an observation that seems more true during summer vacation than in the dead of winter.
 
temporal                        (1) Having to do with time as opposed to eternity; having to do with earthly life as opposed to heavenly existence. (2) Having to do with time as distinguished from space.


E.g.
 The quick passing of the seasons as we grow older makes us feel the fleeting nature of temporal existence.


Temporal existence is often contrasted with spiritual existence, which many religions teach is eternal. The American system of government features a separation of church and state-thatis, a separation of spiritual and temporal authority. But such separation is relatively recent . In past centuries, the Roman Catholic Church exerted temporal authority-thatis, political power
-throughout much of Europe, and the Church of England has always been officially headed by the temporal ruler of Great Britain. Temporal isn'talways used in religious context s; for example, child psychologist s often measure "temporal processing"-thatis, speed of thinking
-in children with mental difficulties. Note that temporal may also mean "near the temples (of the head)"; thus, your brain's temporal lobes are situated atyour temples. But this temporal is based on a different Latin root .
 
contemporary
          (1) Occurring or existing during the same period of time. (2) Having to do with the present period; modern or current .


E.g.
 The two scientist s were contemporary with each other, but neither seemed to have heard of the other's existence.


Contemporary can be confusing because of it s slight ly different meanings. In everyday use, it generally means simply "modern" or "new." But before the 20th century itinstead referred only to things from the same era as certain other things; so, for instance, Jesus was contemporary with the Roman emperors August us and Tiberius, and Muhammad was contemporary with Pope Gregory the Great . And contemporary is also a noun: thus, Jane Austen's contemporaries included Coleridge and Wordsworth, and your own contemporaries were born around the same year thatyou were.
 
extemporaneous
               (1) Composed, performed, spoken, or done on the spur of the moment ; imprompt u or improvised. (2) Carefully prepared but delivered without notes.


E.g.
 It was once common in middle-class  homes to make  extemporaneous  speeches, recite poetry, and give lit t le solo song recitals after a dinner with guest s.


The ability to speak well extemporaneously is an important talent for politicians, especially when participating in debates. (Though it 's also a good idea to have a "spin doct or" who can go outafterward and tell everyone what the candidate really meant to say.) Some people claim  there's   a   difference   bet ween extemporaneous   and impromptu,  saying   that   an extemporaneous speech is planned beforehand but not writ ten down, while an imprompt u speech is genuinely unprepared or off-the-cuff, but t oday the two words are most ly used as synonyms.
 
temporize                    (1) To actin a way that fit s the time or occasion; to give way to current opinion. (2) To draw out discussions to gain time.


E.g.
 The legislature was accused of temporizing while the budget deficit continued to worsen.


The Latin word that temporize comes from meant simply "to pass the time"; the meaning of the  English  word  is  different   but   obviously  related.  People  aren't   usually  admired  for temporizing. A political leader faced with a difficultissue may temporize by talking vaguely about possible solutions withoutactually doing anything. The pointis to avoid taking an action that lot s of people aren't going to like, in hopes that the problem will somehow go away, but  the effectis often just to make mat ters worse.
 
CHRON comes from the Greek word for "time." A chronicle records the event s of a particular time, which is why so many newspapers have the name Chronicle. A chronometer is a device for measuring time, usually one that 's more accurate (and more expensive) than an ordinary watch or clock.
 
chronic                (1)  Lasting  a  long  time  or  recurring  frequent ly. (2) Always  present ; constant ly annoying or troubling; habitual.


E.g.
 He had st opped to pick up ice-cream cones for the kids, hoping it would give him a temporary rest from their chronic bickering.


Chronic coughing goes on and on; chronic lateness occurs day after day; chronic lameness never seems to getany bet ter. Unfort unately, situations that we call chronic almostalways seem to be unpleasant . We never hear aboutchronic peace, but we do hear aboutchronic warfare. And we never speak of chronic health, only of chronic illness.
 
chronology
 (1) A sequence of event s in the order they occurred. (2) A table, list , or account that present s event s in order.


E.g.
 The scandal had got ten so complex that the newspaper had to printa chronology showing the order of the numerous event s involved.


Hist ory is much more than a simple chronology of event s, but keeping event s in chronological order is the firstessential step in thinking aboutit . When, for example, hist orians try to show how World War I prepared the way for World War I, tracking the chronology of the event s in the years bet ween the two wars can help in explaining a complicated hist orical era.
 
anachronism
       (1) The error of placing a person or thing in the wrong time period. (2) A person or thing thatis out of it s own time.


E.g.
 A Model T Ford put t -put ting down the highway at 25 miles per hour was an anachronism by 1940.


In Shakespeare's time, playwright s didn't worry much aboutanachronisms. When Shakespeare saw his plays performed, all the characters, even Romans and Greeks, would have been dressed in the clothes of his own period. Macbeth, which is setin the 11th century, contains anachronistic references to clocks and cannons, which the real Macbeth would have known nothing about . Today, a writer may spend months doing research in order to avoid anachronisms in the hist orical novel she's working on. Using the second meaning of the word, we could say that manual typewriters and slide rules are anachronisms in these days of computers and calculat ors, and a person who likes doing things the old-fashioned way mighthimself be described as an anachronism.
 
synchronous                          (1)  Happening  or  existing  at   exact ly  the  same  time; simultaneous. (2) Recurring or acting atexact ly the same intervals.


E.g.
 The theory depends on whether the chemical appeared in synchronous deposit s worldwide seven million years ago.


Communications satellites are usually putinto a synchronous (or geosynchronous) orbit , circling the earth once every 24 hours and so appearing to hover over a single spot on the surface. This type of synchronized movementis important , since you have to know where to aim your satellite dish. In the computer field, synchronous usually refers to the use of a simple timing signal that permit s very rapid exchange  of  data  bet ween  computers. The  kind  of mysterious coincidence sometimes called synchronicity-such as the appearance of two different comic-strip characters named Dennis the Menace in the U.S. and Britain within three days of each other in 1951-has fascinated people for centuries.
 

 
Number Words

TRI means "three," whether derived from Greek or Latin. A tricycle has three wheels. A triangle
has three sides and three angles. And a triumvirate is a board or government of three people.
 
triad         (1) A group of three usually related people or things. (2) A secret Chinese criminal organization.


E.g.
 The kids in the garage band next door seemed to know six or seven triads and a couple of seventh chords.


The best -known type of triad is a type of musical chord consisting of three notes. A D-major  triad is made up of the notes D, F-sharp, and A; an F-minor triad is made up of F, A-flat , and C; and so on. Major and minor triads form the basis of t onal music, and songs and other pieces usually end with a triadic harmony. In medicine, a triad is a set  of three sympt oms that  go t ogether. The Chinese criminal organizations called triads got their name from the triangular symbol that they used back when they began, centuries ago, as patriotic organizations. Today, with over 100,000 members, the triads operate in the U.S., Canada, and many other countries.
 
trilogy             A series of three creative works that  are closely related and develop a single theme.


E.g.
 William Faulkner's famous "Snopes trilogy" consist s of the novels The Hamlet, The Town, and
The Mansion.


Dozens of tragic trilogies were writ ten for the Greek stage, though only one, Aeschylus's great Oresteia (consisting of Agamemnon, The Libation Bearers, and The Eumenides), has survived complete. Authors  in  later  years  have  occasionally  chosen to create  trilogies to allow themselves to develop a highly complex st ory or cover a long span of time. Tolkien's Lord of the Rings wasn'tactually intended as a trilogy, but since it was published in three volumes it 's usually called one. George Lucas's three original Star Wars movies are an example of a film trilogy (which he followed many years later by another).
 
tricerat ops
     One of a group of large dinosaurs that  lived during the Cretaceous period and had three horns, a bony crest or hood, and hoofed t oes.


E.g.
 The tricerat ops probably used it s three horns for defense against the at tacks of meat -eating dinosaurs.


The name triceratops, meaning literally "three-horned face," refers to the two horns above it s eyes and the smaller third horn on it s snout . Justas striking was the frilled hood or ruff thatrose behind it s head, though no one is quite sure whatit was for. The tricerat ops was one of the last dinosaurs to evolve and also one of the last to become extinct . It could reach lengths of 30 feetand could stand nearly eight feethigh. Despite it s ferocious looks and three-foot - long horns, the tricerat ops was actually a vegetarian.
 
trident           A three-pronged spear, especially one carried by various sea gods in classical mythology.


E.g.
 The bronze stat ue at the middle of the great fountain depicted a sea god emerging from the water, wreathed in seaweed and carrying a large trident .


A tridenthas three prongs or teeth, as the root dent, "t ooth," tells us. The tridenthas long been used to spear fish in different part s of the world, so there's no mystery about why the Greek sea god Poseidon and his Roman counterpart Nept une both carry a tridentas their symbol. In some gladiat or exhibitions in ancientrome, one gladiat or, called a retiarius ("net man"), would be equipped as though he were a fisherman, with a weighted netand a trident ; with his nethe would snare his sword-wielding opponent , and with his tridenthe would spear his helpless foe.
 
trimester                   (1) A period of about three months, especially one of three such periods in a human pregnancy. (2) One of three terms  into  which  an  academic  year  is sometimes divided.


E.g.
 Most women experience morning sickness in the first trimester of pregnancy.


Semester, which comes from the Latin words for "six" and "month," has come to mean half an academic year when the year is divided into two segment s. When an academic year is divided into three segment s, each is called a trimester (which is usually a bit more accurate, since each segment often is close to three months in length). Some colleges operate on the "quarter" system, with the summer being the fourth quarter, but this just means thateach quarter is basically a trimester. In a human pregnancy, a trimester is three months long, representing one- third of the nine months thata typical pregnancy last s.
 
trinity                      (1) (capitalized) The unity of Father, Son, and Holy Spiritas three persons in one God in Christian belief. (2) A group of three people.


E.g.
 In Christian art depicting the Trinity, the Holy Spiritis almostalways shown as a radiant dove.


The nature of the Trinity (or Holy Trinity) has caused centuries of argumentand division within the Christian faith. The word doesn'tactually appear in the Bible it self, but the New Testament does speak of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit t ogether; the Father is underst ood as the protect or of the Jews, the Son as the savior of mankind, and the Holy Spiritas the preserver of the church. Almostall the major Christian sect s may be called trinitarian. The island of Trinidad is one of many places named with the Spanish translation of Trinity.
 
triptych           (1) A picture or carving made in the form of three panels side by side. (2) Something composed or presented in three sections.


E.g.
 The Renaissance produced many beautiful triptychs portraying religious scenes thatare still used as altarpieces.


Triptych contains the root -ptyche, the Greek word for "fold." So a traditional painted or carved triptych has three hinged panels, and the two outer panels fold in t oward the central one. Most triptychs were intended to be mounted over a church altar. Many great triptychs were produced in the Renaissance, perhaps the most famous being Hieronymus Bosch's Garden of Earthly Delights. But major triptychs continued to be produced throughout the 20th century by such painters as Francis Bacon.
 
trivial                      Of lit t le value or importance.


E.g.
 She was so caught up in the trivial details of the trip that she hardly noticed the beautiful scenery.


Trivial  comes  from a  Latin  word  meaning  "crossroads"-that  is, where  three  roads  come t ogether. Since a crossroads is a very public place where all kinds of people might show up, trivialis came to mean "commonplace" or "vulgar." Today the English word has changed slight ly in meaning and instead usually describes something barely worth mentioning. Mathematicians use the word to refer to some part of a proof or definition that 's extremely simple and needn't be explained, but the rest of us tend to use it just to mean "unimportant ." "Small talk" ata party, for example, is usually trivial conversation, though a trivial excuse for not going on a date ("I have to wash my hair") mighthide an emotion thatisn't so trivial ("I can't stand the sight of you"). To trivialize something is to treatitas if it didn't mat ter, as if it were justanother triviality.
 

 

 
