 26


MUR POLIS/POLIT NUMER KILO MICRO MULTI PAR PHOB HEM/HEMO ITIS MedicalWords
Quiz26-1 Quiz26-2 Quiz26-3 Quiz26-4 Quiz26-5 ReviewQuizzes26

MUR, from the Latin noun murus, meaning "wall," has produced a modest number of English words.
 
muralist
 A painter of wall paintings.


E.g.
 She's enjoying her new career as a muralist , butit 's terribly hard on her when she sees her works wrecked by vandals.


Any wall painting may be called a mural. Murals have been around since long before the framed painting. Scenic murals date back to at least 2000 B.C. on the island of Crete. Indoor murals for private homes were popular in ancient Greece and Rome, and many of those at Pompeii were preserved by the lava of Mt . Vesuvius. In the Renaissance the muralist s Raphael and Michelangelo created great wall and ceiling paintings for the Catholic Church, and Leonardo da Vinci's The Last Supper became one of the most famous of all murals. Mural painting saw a greatrevival in Mexico beginning in the 1920s, when a group of muralist s inspired by the Mexican Revolution, including Diego Rivera, J. C. Orozco, and D. A. Siqueiros, began taking their intensely political art to the public by creating giant wall paintings, sometimes on out door surfaces.
 
intramural                        Existing or occurring within the bounds of  an instit ution, especially a school.


E.g.
 At college he lacked the time to go out for sport s in a serious way, buthe did play intramural hockey all four years.


With it s Latin prefix intra-, "within" (not to be confused with inter-, "bet ween"), intramural means literally "within the walls." The word is usually used for sport s played bet ween teams made up only  from  st udent s  at  one   campus.  Intramural  athletics   is   often   the   most   popular extracurricular activity ata college or university.
 
extramural                           Existing out side or beyond the walls or boundaries of an organized unit such as a school or hospital.


E.g.
 "Hospital Without Walls" is an extramural program that offers home health-care services.


Extramural contains the Latin extra-, meaning "out side" or "beyond" (see EXTRA). The walls in extramural are usually those of schools, colleges, and universities, and the word is often seen in phrases like "extramural activities" and "extramural competition," referring to things  thatinvolve the world beyond the campus. Some instit utions use the term "extramural st udy" for what others call "distance learning"-thatis, teaching and learning by means of  Web connections to the classroom and to videos of lectures. Money that flows into universities to supportresearch (from foundations, governmentinstit utes, et c.) is usually called "extramural income."
 
immure                   To enclose within, or as if within, walls; imprison.


E.g.
 In Dumas's famous novel, the Count of Monte Cristo is in facta sailor who had been unjust ly immured in an island prison for 15 years before breaking outand taking his revenge.


In Eastern European legend, whenever a large bridge or fort was completed, a young maiden would be immured in the st onework as a sacrifice. (It 's not certain that such things were actually done.) In Poe's grim st ory "A Cask of Amontillado," a man achieves revenge on a fellow nobleman by chaining him to a cellar wall and bricking him up alive. At the end of Verdi's great opera Aida, Aida joins her lover so that they can die immured t ogether. Butreal-life examples of immurementas a final punishmentare somewhatharder to find.
 
POLIS/POLIT comes from the Greek word for "city." The ancient Greek city-states, such as Athens, Thebes, and Sparta, operated much like separate nations, so all their politics was local, like all their public policy-and even all their police!
 
politic                        (1) Cleverly tact ful. (2) Wise in promoting a plan or plan of action.


E.g.
 Anger is rarely a politic way to seek agreement , since it usually comes across as rude and self-righteous.


Politic behavior in class always requires a respect ful at tit ude t oward your teacher. It 's never politic to ask for a raise when your boss is in a terrible mood. And once teenagers learn to drive, they quickly learn the politic way to ask for the car-thatis, whatever get s the keys without upset ting the parent s. As you can see, politic can be used for many situations thathave nothing to do with public politics.
 
politicize
 To give a political t one or character t o.


E.g.
 By 1968 the Viet nam War had deeply politicized most of America's college campuses.


Sexual harassment was once seen as a private mat ter, butin the 1980s and '90s it became thoroughly politicized, with women loudly pressuring lawmakers to make itillegal. So, at the same time, the issue of sexual harassment politicized many women, who began to take an interestin political action because of it . In other words, we may speak of an issue becoming politicized, butalso of a person or group becoming politicized.
 
acropolis
    The high, fortified part of a city, especially an ancient Greek city.


E.g.
 On the Athenian Acropolis, high above the rest of the city, stands the Parthenon, a temple to Athena.


The Greek rootacro- means "high"; thus, an acropolis is basically a "high city." Ancient cities often grew up around a high point , in order that they could easily be defended. The Greeks and Romans usually included in their acropolises temples to the city's mostimportant gods; so, for example, Athens builta great temple on it s Acropolis to it s protect or goddess, Athena, from which the city t ook it s name. Many later European cities cluster around a walled cast le on a height , into which the population of the city and the surrounding area could retreatin case of at tack, and even South American cities often contain a similar walled area on high ground.
 
megalopolis (1) A very large city. (2) A thickly populated area thatincludes one or more cities with the surrounding suburbs.


E.g.
 With it s rapid development , the southern coast  of Florida around Miami quickly became a megalopolis.


A "large city" named Megalopolis was founded in Greece in 371 B.C. to help defend the region called Arcadia against  the city-state of Sparta. Though a stadium seating 20,000 was built there, indicating the city's impressive size for it s time, Megalopolis t oday has only about 5,000 people. Social scientist s now identify 10 megalopolises in the U.S., each with more than 10 million people. The one on the eastern seaboard that stretches from Bost on to Washingt on, D.C., where the densely populated cities seem to flow into each other all along the coast , is now home to over 50 million people. Butit 's easily surpassed by the Japanese megalopolis thatincludes Tokyo, with more than 80 million inhabitant s.
 

 
NUMER comes from the Latin words meaning "number" and "to count ." A numeral is the symbol thatrepresent s  a  number. Numerous  means  "many,"  and innumerable  means "count less." Numerical superiority is superiority in numbers, and your numerical standing in a class is a ranking expressed as a number.
 
numerology
   The st udy of the occult significance of numbers.


E.g.
 Though he didn't  believe in numerology as a mystical bond bet ween numbers and living things, he never went out on Friday the 13th.


As an element of astrology and fort une-telling, numerology has long been employed to predict future event s. For many early Christians, 3 represented the Trinity, 6 represented earthly perfection, and 7 represented heavenly perfection; and still t oday, many of us like to group things into set s of 3 or 7, for no particular reason. Numerology has also been used to interpret personality; in particular, numerologists may assign numbers to each let ter of a person's name and use the resulting figures, along with the person's date of birth, as a guide to his or her character.
 
alphanumeric
    Having or using both let ters and numbers.


E.g.
 Back in the 1950s, we always spoke our phone numbers in alphanumeric form, using the let ters printed on the dial: for example, "TErrace 5-6642," instead of "835-6642."


Alphanumeric passwords are much harder for a hacker to crack than plain alphabetic passwords, since the number of possible combinations is so much greater. License plates usually contain both let ters and numbers, since, for a big state or country, the plate wouldn't be large enough to fitenough numbers for everyone. In computing, the standard alphanumeric codes, such as ASC I, may contain not only ordinary let ters and numerals butalso punctuation marks and math symbols.
 
enumerate To specify one after another; list .


E.g.
 The thing he hated most was when she would startenumerating his fault s out loud, while he would sit scowling into the newspaper trying to ignore her.


In a census year, the U.S. government  at tempt s to enumerate every single citizen of the country-a task that , even in the modern era of technology, isn't truly possible. Medical test s often  require  the enumeration  of  bacteria, viruses, or  other  organisms to determine  the progress of a disease or the effectiveness of a medication. Despite it s numer- root , you don'thave to use  numbers  when  enumerating.  For  st udent s  of  government   and  law,  the "enumerated powers" are the specific responsibilities of the Congress, as listed in the U.S. Constit ution; these are the only powers that Congress has, a fact that the Tenth Amendment makes even more clearly.
 
supernumerary
               Exceeding the usual number.


E.g.
 Whenever the workload for the city's court s and judges get s t oo large, supernumerary judges are called in to help.


Supernumerary start s off with the Latin prefix super-, "above" (see SUPER). You may have heard of someone being born with supernumerary teeth, supernumerary fingers, or supernumerary t oes. A supernumerary rainbow may show up as a faint line-red, green, or purple-just t ouching the main colored arc. Supernumerary is also a noun: A supernumerary is usually someone in a crowd scene onstage, otherwise known as an "extra" or a "spear-carrier."
 
KILO is the French version of the Greek word chilioi, meaning "thousand." France is also where the metric system originated, in the years following the French Revolution. So in English, kilo- shows up chiefly in metric-system unit s. Before the computer age, the most familiar kilo- words for English-speakers were probably kilowatt, meaning "1,000 wat t s," and kilowatt-hour, meaning the amount of energy equal to one kilowat t over the course of an hour.
 
kilobyte                       A unit of computer information equal to 1,024 bytes.


E.g.
 A 200-word paragraph in the simplest text format takes up abouta kilobyte of st orage space on your hard drive.


Knowing the root kilo-, you might think a kilobyte would be exact ly 1,000 bytes. Butactually a kilobyte represent s the power of 2 that comes closest to 1,000: thatis, 210 (2 to the 10th power), or 2 ¡Á 2 ¡Á 2 ¡Á 2 ¡Á 2 ¡Á 2 ¡Á 2 ¡Á 2 ¡Á 2 ¡Á 2, or 1,024. Why 2E.g.
 Because the capacity of memory chips is always based on powers of 2. Locations in electronic memory circuit s are identified by binary numbers (numbers that use only the digit s 0 and 1), so the number of addressable locations becomes a power of 2.
 
kilometer
    A unit of length equal to 1,000 meters.


E.g.
 U.S. highway signs near the Canadian border often show distances in kilometers in addition to miles.


A kilometer is equal to about 62/100 of a mile, and a mile is equal to about 1.61 kilometers. The
U.S. has been slow to adopt metric measures, which are used almosteverywhere else in the world. Though our car speedometers are often marked in both miles and kilometers, the U.S. and Great Britain are practically the only developed nations that still show miles rather than kilometers on their road signs. Buteven in the U.S., footraces are usually measured in meters or kilometers, like the Olympic races. Runners normally abbreviate kilometer to K: "a 5K race" (3.1 miles), "the 10K run" (6.2 miles), and so on.
 
kilohert z
 A unit of frequency equal to 1,000 cycles per second.


E.g.
 A drone aircraft nosedived and crashed after an onboard tape recorder turned out to be using a 10-kilohert z signal, the same frequency used by the aircraft 's control system.


If  your favorite AM radio station has a frequency of  680 kilohert z  (kHz), that  means the station's transmit ter is oscillating (vibrating) ata rate of 680,000 cycles per  second  (i.e., 680,000 times a second). A related term is megahertz (MHz), meaning "millions of cycles per second." Short wave radio operates bet ween 5.9 and 26.1 MHz, and  the  FM  radio  band operates bet ween 88 and 108 MHz. Garage-door openers work  at  about  40  MHz, baby monit ors work at 49 MHz, and so on. The terms hertz, kilohertz and megahertz honor the great German physicistheinrich Hert z, the first person to broadcastand receive radio waves.
 
kilogram
 A unit of weightequal to 1,000 grams.


E.g.
 The kilogram is the only base unit of measurement still defined by a physical objectrather than a physical constant (such as the speed of light ).


The original concept of the kilogram, as the mass of a cubic decimeter of water (a bit more than a quart ), was adopted as the base unit of mass by the new revolutionary government of France in 1793. In 1875, in the Treaty of the Meter, 17 countries, including the U.S., adopted the French kilogram as an international standard. In 1889 a new international standard for the kilogram, a metal bar made of platinum iridium, was agreed t o; President Benjamin Harrison officially received the 1-kilogram cylinder for the U.S. in 1890. But no one uses that bar very often; for all practical purposes, a kilogram equals 2.2 pounds.
 

 
MICRO, from the Greek mikros, meaning "small," is a popular English prefix. A microscope let s the eye see microscopic object s, and libraries st ore the pages of old newspapers on microfilm at 1/400th of their original size. And we continue to at tach micro- to lot s of familiar words; most of us could figure out  the meaning of microbus  and microquake without  ever having heard them before. Scientist s often use micro- to mean "millionth"; thus, a microsecond is a millionth of a second, and a micrometer is a millionth of a meter.
 
microbe         An  organism  (such  as  a  bacterium)  of  microscopic  or  less than microscopic size.


E.g.
 Vaccines reduce  the  risk  of  diseases  by  using  dead  or  great ly  weakened  microbes to stimulate the immune system.


A hint of the Greek word bios, meaning "life," can be seen in microbe. Microbes, or microorganisms, include bacteria, prot ozoa, fungi, algae, amoebas, and slime molds. Many people think of microbes as simply the causes of disease, butevery human is actually the host to billions of microbes, and most of them are essential to our life. Much research is now going into  possible microbial sources of future  energy; algae  looks  particularly  promising, as  do certain newly discovered or created microbes that can produce cellulose, to be turned into ethanol and other biofuels.
 
microbiologist
   A scientist who st udies extremely small forms of life, such as bacteria and viruses.


E.g.
 Food microbiologist s st udy the tiny organisms that cause spoiling and foodborne illness.


Since microorganisms are involved in almostevery aspect of life on earth, microbiologist s work across a broad range of subjectareas. Some st udy only viruses, some only bacteria. A marine microbiologist st udies the roles of microbial communities in the sea. A soil microbiologist might focus on the use and spread of nitrogen. Veterinary microbiologist s mightresearch bacteria thatat tack racehorses or diagnose anthrax in cows. And the government put s microbiologist s to work st udying whether microbes could adapt to life on the surface of Mars, and how to defend ourselves against the possibility of germ warfare.
 
microbrew
 A beer made by a brewery that makes beer in small amount s.


E.g.
 As a city of 75,000 people with eight breweries, it offers a greater variety of microbrews per capita than any other place in America.


Microbrews are usually beers or ales made with special malt s  and  hops, unfiltered  and unpasteurized, and thus distinctive in their aroma and flavor. Many microbreweries double as bar/restaurant s, called brewpubs, where the gleaming vat s  may  be  visible  behind  a  glass partition. "Craft brewing" and the opening of local brewpubs began in earnestin the U.S. in the 1980s. But noteveryone is willing to pay extra for a beer, and lot s of people are simply used to the blander taste of the best -selling beers, so by 2008 microbrews still only accounted for about 4% of all beer sold in the U.S.
 
microclimate
    The essentially uniform local climate of a small site or habitat .


E.g.
 Temperature, light , wind speed, and moisture are the essential component s of a microclimate.


The microclimate of an industrial park may be quite different from that of a nearby wooded park, since the plant s absorb light  and heat while asphalt  parking lot s and rooft ops radiate them back into the air. A microclimate can offer a small growing area for crops that wouldn't do well in the wider region, so skilled gardeners take advantage of microclimates by carefully choosing and positioning their plant s. San Francisco's hills, oceanfront , and bay shore, along with it s alternating areas of concrete and greenery, make ita city of microclimates.
 
MULTI comes from the Latin word multus, meaning "many." Thus, a multicultural society is one thatincludes people  of  several  different  countries, languages, and  religions; a multimedia art work uses two or more artistic media (dance, music, film, spoken text , et c.); and a multitude of complaint s reaching your office would be a great many indeed.
 
multicellular
       Consisting of many cells.


E.g.
 Multicellular organisms-fungi, plant s, and animals-have specialized cells that perform different functions.


Multicellular organisms are distinguished from the  very  primitive  single-celled  organisms- bacteria, algae, amoebas, et c. Even sponges, simple as they are, have specialized cell types such as digestive cells. In complex multicellular organisms, only the surface cells can exchange substances with the external environment ,  so  the  organisms  have  developed  transport systems such as the circulat ory system, in which the blood brings gases and nutrient s to the cells and removes waste product s from them.
 
multidisciplinary
                    Involving two or more subjectareas.


E.g.
 Her favorite class was Opera, a multidisciplinary class taught joint ly by a music professor and a literature professor.


A discipline is a field of st udy. So a multidisciplinary (or interdisciplinary) course is a team- taught course in which st udent s are asked to understand a single subjectas it 's seen by two or more traditional disciplines. Multidisciplinary teaching can open st udent s' eyes to different views of a subject that they had never considered before. A multidisciplinary panel discussion, on the other hand, present s views from scholars in different fields but may leave any merging of the information to the audience.
 
multifarious
    Having or occurring in great variety; diverse.


E.g.
 Natives put the coconut palm to multifarious uses: using the nut s for eating, the juice for drinking, the wood for building hut s, the leaves for thatch, the fiber for mat s, and the shells for utensils.


Multifarious is a rather grand word, probably not for everyday use, but when you want to emphasize great variety-such as the huge number of uses to which a state-of-the-art cell phone can be put -it can be  effective. Dictionary  fans  are  constant ly  amazed  by  the multifarious meanings of the word set (47 of them in one unabridged dictionary), and thesaurus lovers may marvel at the multifarious synonyms for drunk.
 
multilateral
    Involving more than two nations or parties.


E.g.
 A couple of times a year, representatives of the large industrial democracies meet for a round of multilateral trade negotiations.


Sin ce lateral means "side" (see LATER) , multilateral means basically "many-sided." The philosophy of multilateralism claims that the best solutions generally result when as many of the  world's nations as possible  are  involved  in  discussions, and multilateralists often favor strengthening the United Nations. Today multilateralism can be seen at work in, for example, the World Health Organization, the World Trade Organization, and the International Criminal Court . But the U.S. doesn'talways join the major multilateral organizations, instead often behaving as if a unilateral approach-thatis, going italone-was best for the interest s of a powerful nation.
 

 
PAR, from the Latin, means "equal." Our English word par means an amount taken as an average or a standard, and especially the standard score for each hole on a golf course- which is why the phrase "par for the course" means "aboutas well as expected." We compare things to see if they're equal; similar things can be called comparable-thatis, "equal with." And "on a par with" means "comparable t o."
 
parity                       The state of being equal.


E.g.
 Thatyear the Canadian dollar reached parity with the U.S. dollar for the first time in three decades.


Parity has special meanings in such fields as physics, math, medicine, genetics, and marketing. Back when the Soviet Union and the U.S. were opposing superpowers, there was often talk of parity in nuclear weapons bet ween the two sides. We sometimes hear about parity bet ween mental and physical health in insurance coverage, or parity in colleges' funding of men's and women's athletics. But parity may be most common in discussions of currencies. The exchange rate bet ween two national currencies often changes every day, as each drift s higher or lower, and occasionally two similar currencies, such as the euro and the U.S. dollar, will achieve parity, butitrarely last s long.
 
disparity
   A noticeable and often unfair difference bet ween people or things.


E.g.
 He'd been noticing an increasing disparity bet ween what the government was claiming and whathe saw happening all around him.


Disparity contains the Latin dis, meaning "apart " or "non-" (see DIS), so a disparity is a kind of "nonequality." The word is often used to describe a social or economic condition that 's considered unfairly unequal: a racial disparity in hiring, a health disparity bet ween the rich and the poor, an income disparity bet ween men and women, and so on. It s adjective, disparate (accented on the first syllable), is often used to emphasize strong differences.
 
nonpareil
  Someone or something of unequaled excellence.


E.g.
 Critics seem to agree that this is the new nonpareil of video-game consoles, the one to beat .


American children learn this word (even if they can't pronounce it ) as the name of the candies covered with white sugar pellet s that they buy at the movie theater, and it 's also the name of  the pellet s themselves. But the more general meaning is common t oo. Nonpareil is also an adjective. A famous boxing champion of the 1920s was known as Nonpareil Jack Dempsey, when he wasn't being called "the Manassa Mauler." Like it s synonyms paragon and peerless, nonpareil is popular as a company and product name; it 's also the name of a fruit , an almond, a bird, and a but terfly.
 
subpar                        Below a usual or normal level.


E.g.
 Because of a severe cold, her performance thatevening had been subpar, but the audience seemed to love itanyway.


Since sub- means "below" (see SUB), almostanything that fails to measure up to a traditional standard may be called subpar. So you may hear of subpar ratings for a TV show, subpar care ata nursing home, subpar at tendance ata concert , or subpar work by a contract or. If you played a subpar round of golf, though, you needed more strokes than you should have.
 
PHOB comes from the Greek noun phobos, "fear," and it shows up clearly in our noun phobia, meaning "unusual fear of a specific thing." Phobias vary great ly in seriousness and also in frequency. Most of us have experienced claustrophobia at some time, but few truly suffer from fear of the number 13, a condition known as triskaidekaphobia.
 
acrophobic
    Fearful of height s.


E.g.
 She's so acrophobic that , whenever she can'tavoid taking the route thatincludes the high bridge, she asks the police to drive her across.


The Greek akron means "height " or "summit ," and the acro- root can be seen in such words as acrobatand Acropolis. Almosteveryone has some fear of height s, butan abnormal dread of high places, along with the vertigo (dizziness) that mostacrophobes also experience, are common as well; in fact , acrophobia is one of the half-dozen most common recognized phobias. Acrophobia and claustrophobia both play a role in another well-known phobia: the fear of flying, it self often known as aerophobia.
 
agoraphobia
       A  fear  of  being  in  embarrassing  or  inescapable situations, especially in open or public places.


E.g.
 After barely surviving a terrible at tack of agoraphobia in the middle of the Sonoran Desert , he finally agree to start seeing a psychologist .


The agora was the market place in ancient Greece; thus, agoraphobia often involves fear of public places and crowds. Butitalso may involve fear of being in shops, or even fear of being in open spaces, or fear of traveling alone. It may also  be  a  fear  of  experiencing  some uncontrollable or embarrassing event (like fainting) in the presence of others with no help available. Agoraphobia can be hard to understand for those who don't suffer from it , especially because it can take so many different forms, butitis often a serious and socially crippling condition.
 
xenophobe
One who has a fear or hatred of strangers or foreigners.


E.g.
 A Middle Easterner reading the U.S.'s visa restrictions might feel that the State Depart ment was run by xenophobes.


Xenophobe is part ly based on the Greek noun xenos, meaning "stranger, guest , foreigner." Unlike other phobias, xenophobia isn'treally considered an abnormal condition; instead, it 's generally thought of as just serious narrow-mindedness, the kind of thinking that goes along with racism and extreme patriotism. In times of war, a government will often actually try to turn all it s citizens into xenophobes.
 
arachnophobia
        Having a fear or dislike of spiders.


E.g.
 At 50, my sister still suffers from arachnophobia, and can't sleep in a room unless she knows ithas no spiders.


In Greek mythology, Arachne was a weaver of such skill that she dared to challenge the goddess Athena ather craft . When she won their competition by weaving a tapestry disrespect ful to the gods, the enraged Athena t ore it to shreds, and in despair Arachne hanged herself. Out of pity, Athena loosened the rope, which became a cobweb, and changed Arachne into a spider. Today, the spiders, scorpions, mites, and ticks all belong to the class known as arachnids. Arachnophobia is the most common of the animal phobias; but many people suffer from similar phobias regarding snakes (ophidiophobia), dogs (cynophobia), and mice and rat s (musophobia).
 

 
Medical Words

HEM/HEMO comes from the Greek word for "blood" and is found at the beginning of many medical terms. By dropping the h-, the same word produced the suffix -emia, which likewise shows up in lot s of "blood" words, including anemia, leukemia and hyperglycemia.
 
hemorrhage             (1) A large  loss  of  blood  from  a  blood  vessel. (2) A rapid  and uncontrollable loss or out flow.


E.g.
 He arrived at the emergency room reporting headache, nausea, and drowsiness, and the doct or immediately suspected thathe'd suffered a brain hemorrhage.


A hemorrhage usually result s from either a severe blow to the body or from medication being taken for something else. Though many hemorrhages aren't particularly serious, those that occur in the brain (cerebral hemorrhages) can be life-threatening. In older people, hemorrhages are often caused by blood-thinning medication taken to preventheartat tacks. A bruise (or hematoma) is a hemorrhage close enough to the surface of the skin to be visible. Hemorrhage is also a verb, which isn'talways used to talk aboutactual blood; thus, we may hear thata business is hemorrhaging money, or that the U.S. has been hemorrhaging industrial jobs for decades. Be careful when writing hemorrhage; it 's notan easy word to spell.
 
hemat ology
   The st udy of blood and blood-forming organs.


E.g.
 Her specialty in hemat ology lether work with patient s of all ages and types, since blood problems may affectalmostanyone.


Blood is basic to almostall the body's functions, and a blood test can reveal more aboutyour physical condition than almostany other kind of examination, so hemat ology is an important medical specialty, with many separate subject s. Since blood cells are formed in the bone marrow, the bones are one important focus for hematologists. The coagulation, or thickening, of the blood is another important subject , since coagulation is what keeps us from bleeding to death from even small wounds. And there are dozens of serious blood diseases, including anemia (a lack of red blood cells) and leukemia (cancer involving a buildup of white blood cells).
 
hemophilia A  bleeding  disorder  caused  by  the  blood's  inability to coagulate.


E.g.
 When he was a child, his hemophilia had kepthim from joining the other kids in rough play atrecess.


The dreaded disease known as hemophilia is the result  of  an inherited gene, and almostalways strikes boys rather than girls (though mothers may pass the gene to their sons). Since the blood lacks an ingredient that causes it to clot or coagulate when a blood vessel breaks, even a minor wound can cause a hemophiliac to bleed to death if not treated. Bleeding can be particularly dangerous when it 's entirely internal, with no visible wound, since the person may not be aware it 's happening. Queen Vict oria transmit ted the hemophilia gene to royal families all across Europe; the hemophilia of a young Russian prince played a partin the downfall of the Russian  czars.  Today,  hemophiliacs  take  drugs  that st op  the  bleeding  by  speeding coagulation, and hemophiliac life expectancies in developed countries are almostas long as the average.
 
hemoglobin
      The element  in blood that  transport s oxygen from the lungs to the body's tissues and transport s carbon dioxide from the tissues back to the lungs.


E.g.
 Her doct or had noticed her low hemoglobin countand was insisting that she include more iron-rich vegetables in her diet .


When filled with oxygen, the hemoglobin in your blood is brightred; returning to the lungs withoutit s oxygen, it loses it s bright ness and becomes somewhat bluish. Hemoglobin levels can change from day to day, and may be affected by such fact ors as a lack of iron in the diet , a recent loss of blood, and being pregnant . When you give blood, a nurse first pricks your finger to testyour hemoglobin level; a low hemoglobin countindicates anemia and may mean thatyou shouldn't give blood that day. Mild anemia is generally of lit t le importance, but some types can be very serious.
 
ITIS, a suffix found in both Greek and Latin, means "disease" or "inflammation." In appendicitis your appendix is swollen and painful, and in tonsillitis the same is true of your t onsils. With laryngitis, your throatand larynx may become so sore thatit 's difficult to talk. Some of us enjoy making up our own -itis words; high-school teachers, for example, long ago noticed that many of their seniors tended to lose all interestin schoolwork and start skipping classes, and labeled the condition senioritis.
 
bursitis                  Inflammation of a lubricating sac (bursa), especially of the shoulder or elbow.


E.g.
 My barber developed bursitis after many years of lifting his arms all day.


A bursa is a lit t le pouch filled with fluid that sit s bet ween a tendon and a bone. When the fluid becomes infected by bacteria or irritated by t oo much movement , bursitis result s. Throwing a baseball t oo many times at one session, for example, may inflame and irritate one of the bursae (notice the plural form) in the shoulder. Bursitis in another part of the body may be known by a traditional name such as "housemaid's knee," "soldier's heel," or "tennis elbow." Bursitis generally goes away after a few weeks of resting the affected area, and the pain can be treated with ice packs and aspirin.
 
hepatitis
    Inflammation of the liver.


E.g.
 His skin now had a yellowish tinge, as did the whites of his eyes, and his doct or immediately recognized the signs of advanced hepatitis.


The liver, the body's largest gland, performs many important tasks, butis also vulnerable to many illnesses. At least five types of hepatitis, labeled with the let ters A-E, are caused by viruses. The most common are hepatitis A, acquired through contaminated food and water; hepatitis B, which usually travels via sexual activity or shared needles; and hepatitis C, generally passed through shared needles. Some other types, including alcoholic hepatitis (caused by drinking t oo much alcohol), aren'tinfectious. There are vaccines for types A and B, and drug treat ment s for A, B, and C, though the drugs aren'talways effective.
 
bronchitis
 Inflammation of the bronchial t ubes.


E.g.
 Before the smoking ban wentinto effect , three flightat tendant s had sued the airline, claiming secondhand smoke was to blame for their bronchitis.


The bronchial t ubes carry air into the tiny branches and smaller cells of the lungs. In bronchitis, the t ubes become sore and you develop a deep cough. Bronchitis caused by bacteria can be treated with antibiotics, but there's no drug treat ment for the more common kind caused by a virus. A bout of bronchitis may involve  a couple of weeks of coughing (with no laughing allowed), weakness, and loss of energy and interestin doing things. Apart from that , bronchitis is rarely serious-at leastif it doesn't progress to pneumonia.
 
tendinitis                      A painful condition in which a tendon in the arm or leg becomes inflamed.


E.g.
 After years of tennis and bicycling, she now has tendinitis of both the elbow and the knee.


Tendinitis is often seen in active, healthy people who do something that  requires repeated motion, including golfers and tennis players (especially those with improper form), carpenters, and violinist s. It 's usually treated by keeping the joint from moving, by means of a splint , cast , or bandage. If  not  dealt  with in time, tendinitis can turn into the more serious tendinosis, or tendon degeneration.
 

 

 
