 5


MAL CATA PROT/PROTO ANTE ORTHO RECT EU DYS LatinBorrowings
Quiz5-1 Quiz5-2 Quiz5-3 Quiz5-4 Quiz5-5 ReviewQuizzes5

MAL comes from a Latin word meaning "bad." A malady is a bad condition-a disease or illness
-of the body or mind. Malpractice is bad medical practice. Malodorous things smell bad. And a
malefactor is someone guilty of bad deeds.
 
malevolent
Having or showing intense ill will or hatred.


E.g.
 Captain Ahab sees Moby Dick not simply as a whale butas a powerfully malevolent foe.


Malevolence runs deep. Malevolentenemies have bit ter and lasting feelings of ill will. Malevolentracism and bigotry can eruptin act s of violence againstinnocent people. Malevolence can also show it self in hurt ful words, and can sometimes be seen in something as small as an angry look or gesture.
 
malicious
 Desiring to cause pain, injury, or distress to another.


E.g.
 The boys didn't take the apples with any malicious intent ; they were justhungry and didn't know any bet ter.


Malicious and malevolentare close in meaning, since both refer to ill will that desires to see someone else suffer. But while malevolent suggest s deep and lasting dislike, malicious usually means pet ty and spiteful. Malicious gossipers are often simply envious of a neighbor's good fort une. Vandals may take malicious pleasure in destroying and defacing property but usually don't truly hate the owners. Malice is an important legal concept , which has to be proved in order to convict someone of certain crimes such as first -degree murder.
 
malign                   To make harsh and often false or misleading statement s about .


E.g.
 Captain Bligh of the Bounty may be one of the most unjust ly maligned figures in British naval hist ory.


Malign is related to verbs like defame, slander, and libel. The person or group being maligned is the victim of false or misleading statement s, even if the maligner isn't necessarily guilty of deliberate lying. Someone or something that 's frequent ly criticized is often said to be "much maligned," which suggest s that the criticism isn'tentirely fair or deserved. Malign is also an adjective, and writers often refer to a person's malign influence. The very similar malignant, which used to be a common synonym of malign, t oday tends to describe dangerous medical conditions, especially cancerous t umors.
 
malnourished
     Badly or poorly nourished.


E.g.
 When they finally found the children in the locked cabin, they were pale and malnourished but unharmed.


Malnourished people can be found in all types of societies. Famine and poverty are only two of the common causes of malnutrition. In wealthier societies, malnutrition is often the result of poor eating habit s. Any diet that fails to provide the nutrient s needed for health and growth can lead to malnutrition, and some malnourished people are actually fat .
 
CATA comes from the Greek kata, one of whose meanings was "down." A catalogue is a list of items put down on paper, and a catapultis a weapon for hurling missiles down on one's enemies.
 
cataclysm                        (1) A violentand massive change of the earth's surface. (2) A moment ous event thatresult s in great upheaval and often destruction.


E.g.
 World War I was a great cataclysm in modern hist ory, marking the end of the old European social and political order.


The -clysm part of cataclysm comes from the Greek word meaning "to wash," so cataclysm's original meaning was "flood, deluge," and especially Noah's Flood it self. A cataclysm causes greatand lasting changes. An earthquake or other natural disaster thatchanges the landscape is one kind of cataclysm, buta violent political revolution may also be a cataclysmic event . Many cataclysms could instead be called catastrophes.
 
catacomb                   An  underground  cemetery  of  connecting  passageways  with recesses for t ombs.


E.g.
 The early Christian catacombs of Rome provide a striking glimpse into the ancient past for modern-day visit ors.


About forty Christian catacombs have been found near the roads that once led into Rome. After the decline of the Roman empire these cemeteries were forgot ten, not to be rediscovered until 1578. Catacomb has come to refer to different kinds of underground chambers and passageways. The catacombs of Paris are abandoned st one quarries that were not used for burials until 1787. The catacombs built by a monastery in Palermo, Sicily, for it s deceased members later began accepting bodies from out side the monastery; t oday you may wander through looking athundreds of mummified corpses propped against the catacomb walls, dressed in tat tered clothes that were once fashionable.
 
catalyst                    (1) A substance that  speeds up a chemical reaction or let s it  take place under different conditions. (2) Someone or something that brings about or speeds significantchange or action.


E.g.
 The assassination of Archduke Ferdinand in Sarajevo in 1914 turned out to be the catalyst for World War I.


Chemical catalyst s are substances that , in very small amount s, can bring aboutimportantchemical changes in large quantities of material. The catalytic converter in your car's exhaust system, for instance, uses tiny amount s of platinum to swift ly convert the engine's dangerous gases to carbon dioxide and water vapor. And it 's easy to see how the meaning of catalyst could broaden to include nonchemical situations. We can now say, for example, that the Great Depression served as the catalyst for such important social reforms as Social Security.
 
catat onic                     (1) Relating to or suffering from a form of schizophrenia. (2) Showing an unusual lack of movement , activity, or expression.


E.g.
 After an hour, extreme boredom had produced a catat onic st upor in those of the audience who were still awake.


Catatonia is primarily a form of the terrible mental disease known as schizophrenia, though it may show up in patient s with a variety of other mental conditions. A common sympt om is extreme muscular rigidity; catat onic patient s may be "frozen" for hours or even days in a single position. It s causes remain mysterious. Serious though the condition is, most nondoct ors use catatonic humorously to describe people who seem incapable of moving or changing expression.
 

 
PROT/PROTO comes from Greek and has the basic meaning "firstin time" or "first formed." Protozoa are one-celled animals, such as amoebas and paramecia, thatare among the most basic members of the biological kingdom. A proton is an elementary particle that , along with neutrons, can be found in all at omic nuclei. A protoplanetis a whirling mass of gas and dust thatastronomers believe may someday become a planet .
 
protagonist
 The main character in a literary work.


E.g.
 Macbeth is the ruthlessly ambitious protagonist of Shakespeare's play, butitis his wife who pulls the strings.


Struggle, or conflict , is central to drama. The protagonist or hero of a play, novel, or film is involved in a struggle of some kind, either against someone or something else or even againsthis or her own emotions. So the hero is the "first struggler," which is the literal meaning of the Greek word         prtagnists. A character who opposes the hero is the antagonist, from a Greek verb that means literally "to struggle against ."
 
prot ocol                         (1) A code of diplomatic or military rules of behavior. (2) A set of rules for the format ting of data in an electronic communications system.


E.g.
 The guest s at the governor's dinner were introduced and seated according to the strict prot ocol governing such occasions.


The basic meaning of proto- is a lit t le harder to follow in this word. Protocol comes from a Greek word for the first sheet of a papyrus roll. In English, protocol originally meant "a first draft or record," and later specifically the first draft of a diplomatic document , such as a treaty. The "diplomatic" connection led eventually to it s current meaning of "rules of behavior." Someone wearing Bermuda short s and sandals to a state dinner at the White House would not be acting "according to prot ocol," and royal prot ocol forbids t ouching the queen of England except to shake her hand. But protocol is also now used for other set s of rules, such as those for doing a scientific experiment or for handling computer data.
 
prot oplasm
    The substance that makes up the living part s of cells.


E.g.
 A mixture of organic and inorganic substances, such as protein and water, prot oplasm is regarded as the physical basis of life.


After the word protoplasm was coined in the mid-19th century for the jellylike material thatis the main substance of a cell, it began to be used widely, especially by scientist s and others who imagined that the first life-forms musthave arisen out of a great seething protoplasmic soup. Since prot oplasm includes all the cell's living material, inside and out side the nucleus, itis a less useful scientific word t oday than more precise terms such as cytoplasm, which refers only to the living material out side the nucleus. But many remain fascinated by the image of that soup bubbling away as the light ning flashes and the volcanoes erupt .
 
prot otype              (1) An original model on which something is pat terned. (2) A first , full-scale, usually working version of a new type or design.


E.g.
 There was greatexcitement when, after years of t op-secret development , the prot otype of the new Stealth bomber first t ook to the skies.


A prot otype is someone or something that serves as a model or inspiration. A successful fund- raising campaign can serve as a prot otype for future campaigns, for example, and the legendary Robin Hood is the prototypical honorable out law, the inspiration for count less other romantic heroes. But the term is perhaps most widely used in the world of technology; every new "concept car," for example, start s off as a unique prot otype.
 
ANTE is Latin for "before" or "in front of." Antediluvian, which describes something very old or out dated, literally means "before the flood"-thatis, Noah's Flood. And antebellum literally means "before the war," usually the American Civil War.
 
antechamber
   An outer room that leads to another and is often used as a waiting room.


E.g.
 The antechamber to the lawyer's office was both elegantand comfortable, designed to inspire trustand confidence.


One expect s to find an antechamber out side the private chambers of a Supreme Court Justice or leading into the greathall of a medieval cast le. In the private end of the cast le the lord's or lady's bedchamber would have it s own antechamber, which served as a dressing room and sit ting room, but could also house bodyguards if the cast le came under siege. Anteroom is a less formal synonym, one that 's often applied to the waiting rooms of professional offices t oday.
 
antedate                        (1) To date something (such as a check) with a date earlier than that of actual writing. (2) To precede in time.


E.g.
 Nant ucket Island has hundreds of beautifully preserved houses thatantedate the Civil War.


Dinosaurs antedated the firsthuman beings by almost 65 million years, though this st ubborn fact never used to st op cart oonist s and screenwriters from having the two species inhabit the same st ory line. Dictionary edit ors are constant ly noticing how the oral use of a word may antedate it s firstappearance in print by a number of years. Antedating a check or a contractisn'tillegal unless it 's done for the purpose of fraud (the same is true of it s opposite, postdating).
 
antecedent
(1) A word or phrase thatis referred to by a pronoun that follows it . (2) An event or cause coming before something.


E.g.
 As I remember, she said "My uncle is taking my father, and he's staying overnight ," but I'm not sure what the antecedent of "he" was.


A basic principle of clear writing is to keep your antecedent s clear. Pronouns are often used in order not to repeata noun (so instead of saying "Sheila turns 22 t omorrow, and Sheila is having a party," we replace the second "Sheila" with "she"). But sloppy writers sometimes leave their antecedent s unclear (for instance, "Sheila helps Kathleen out , but she doesn'tappreciate it ," where itisn't clear who "she" is). Watch out for this possible problem when using not justhe and she butalso they, them, it, this, and that. And keep in mind thatantecedentisn't justa grammar term. You may talk about the antecedent s of heart disease (such as bad eating habit s), the antecedent s of World War I (such as the unwise Treaty of Versailles), and even your own antecedent s (your mother, grandfather, et c.).
 
anterior
(1) Located before or t oward the front or head. (2) Coming before in time or development .


E.g.
 When she moved up to join the first -class passengers in the plane's anterior section, she was delighted to recognize the governor in the next seat .


Anterior generally appears in either medical or scholarly context s. Anat omy books refer to the anterior lobe of the brain, the anterior cerebral artery, the anterior facial vein, et c. Scholar and lawyers may use anterior to mean "earlier in time or order." For example, supporters of states' right s point out that the individual states enjoyed certain right s anterior to their joining the union. And prenuptial agreement s are designed to protect the asset s that one or both parties acquired anterior to the marriage.
 

 
ORTHO comes from orthos, the Greek  word for "straight ," "right ," or "true." Orthotics is a branch of therapy that straightens outyour stance or posture by providing artificial support for weak joint s or muscles. And orthograde animals, such as human beings, walk with their bodies in a "straight " or vertical position.
 
orthodontics
  A branch of dentistry that deals with the treat mentand correction of crooked teeth and other irregularities.


E.g.
 A specialty in orthodontics would require three more years of st udy after completing her dentistry degree.


Orthodontics has been practiced since ancient times, but the elaborate techniques familiar to us t oday were introduced only in recent decades. Braces, retainers, and headgear are used to fix such conditions as crowding of the teeth and overbites. According to a 1939 text , "Speech defect s, psychiatric disturbances, personality changes, . . . all are correctable through orthodontic measures," though many adolescent s, having endured the embarrassment of rubber bands breaking and even of entangling their braces while kissing, might disagree.
 
orthodox                   (1)  Holding   established   beliefs,  especially  in   religion.  (2) Conforming to established rules or traditions; conventional.


E.g.
 The O'Briens remain orthodox Catholics, faithfully observing the time-honored rituals of their church.


An orthodox religious belief or interpretation is one handed down by a church's founders or leaders. When capitalized, as in Orthodox Judaism, Orthodox refers to a branch within a larger religious organization  that  claims to honor the  religion's  original or traditional beliefs. The steadfastholding of established beliefs thatis seen in religious orthodoxy is apparentalso in other kinds of orthodox  behavior. Orthodox  medical  treat ment , for  example, follows  the established practices of mainstream medicine. Unorthodox thinking is known in business language as "thinking out side the box."
 
orthopedics
     The  correction  or  prevention  of  deformities  of  the skelet on.


E.g.
 For surgery to correct  the  child's  spinal curvature, they  were  referred to the  hospital's orthopedics section.


Justas an orthodontist correct s crookedness in the teeth, an orthopedist correct s crookedness in the skelet on. Orthopedics is formed in part from the Greek word for "child," and many orthopedic patient s are in factchildren. Butadult s also often have need of orthopedic therapy, as when suffering from a joint disease like arthritis or when recovering from a broken arm or leg.
 
orthography
The  spelling  of  words,  especially  spelling  according to standard usage.


E.g.
 Even such eloquent writers as George Washingt on and Thomas Jefferson were deficientin the skill of orthography.


Even as recent ly as the 19th century, the orthography of the English language  was still unset t led. Not until spelling books like Noah Webster's and text books like "McGuffey's Readers" came along did uniform spelling become established in the U.S. Before that , there was much orthographic variation, even among the more educated. The many people who still have problems with spelling can take heart from Mark Twain, who once remarked, "I don't give a damn for a man that can spell a word only one way."
 
RECT comes from the Latin word rectus, which means "straight "  or  "right ."  To correct something is to make itright . A rectangle is a four-sided figure with straight parallel sides. Rectus, short for Latin rectus musculus, may refer to any of several straight muscles, such as those of the abdomen.
 
rectit ude
Moral integrity.


E.g.
 The school superintendent was stern and not terribly popular, but no one questioned her moral rectit ude.


We associate straight ness with honesty, so if we suspect someone is lying we mightask if they're being "straight " with us, and we might call a lawbreaker crooked or label him a crook. Rectitude may sound a lit t le old-fashioned t oday, but the virt ue itrepresent s never really goes out of style.
 
rectify                       To setright ; remedy.


E.g.
 The college is moving to rectify this unfort unate situation before anyone else get s hurt .


We rectify something by straightening it out or making itright . We mightrectify an injustice by seeing to it thata wrongly accused person is cleared. An error in a financial record can be rectified by replacing an incorrect number with a correct one. If the error is in our tax return, the Internal Revenue Service will be happy to rectify it for us; we might then have to rectify the impression that we were trying to cheat on our taxes.
 
rectilinear
  (1) Moving in or forming a straight  line. (2) Having many straight lines.


E.g.
 After admiring Frank Lloyd Wright 's rectilinear buildings for years, the public was ast onished by the giant spiral of the Guggenheim Museum.


Rectilinear pat terns or constructions are those in which straight lines are strikingly obvious. In geometry, rectilinear usually means "perpendicular"; thus, a rectilinear polygon is a many-sided shape whose angles are all rightangles (the foot print s of mosthouses, with their extensions and garages, are good examples). Butrectilinear is particularly used in physics. Rectilinear motion is motion in which the speed remains constantand the path is a straight line; and rectilinear rays, such as lightrays, travel in a straight line.
 
directive                      Something that  guides or direct s; especially, a general instruction from a high-level body or official.


E.g.
 At the very beginning of the administration, the cabinet secretary had sent outa directive to all border-patrol personnel.


As the definition states, a directive directs. A directive from a school principal might provide guidance abouthandling holiday celebrations in class. A directive from the Vatican might specify new wording for the Mass in various languages. Even the European Union issues directives to it s member countries, which they often ignore.
 

 
EU comes from the Greek word for "well"; in English words it can also mean "good" or "true." A veterinarian who performs euthanasia is providing a very sick or hopelessly injured animal a "good" or easy death.
 
eugenic                     Relating to or fit ted  for the  production  of  good  offspring  through controlled breeding.


E.g.
 Eugenic techniques have been part of sheep breeding for many years.


The word eugenic, like the name Eugene, includes the Greek root meaning "born" (see GEN). Breeders of farm animals have long used eugenic methods to produce horses thatrun faster, for example, or pigs that provide more meat . Through eugenics, Holstein cows have become one of the world's highest producers of milk. Buteugenics also has a dark side. The idea of human eugenics was taken up enthusiastically by the Nazis in the 20th century, with terrible consequences.
 
euphemism
   An  agreeable  or  inoffensive  word  or  expression  that  is substit uted for one that may offend or disgust .


E.g.
 The Vict orians, uncomfortable with the physical side of human existence, had euphemisms for most bodily functions.


The use of euphemisms is an ancient part of the English language, and perhaps of all languages, and all of us use them. Golly and gosh started outas euphemisms for God, and darn is a  familiar  euphemism  for damn.  Shoot,  shucks,  and sugar  are  all euphemistic substit utes for a well-known vulgar word. Pass away for die, misspeak for lie, downsize for fire, senior citizen for old person-the list goes on and on.
 
euphoria
A strong feeling of well-being or happiness.


E.g.
 Swept up in the euphoria of a Super Bowl vict ory, the whole city seemed to have poured outinto the street s.


Euphoria is the feeling of an intense (and usually temporary) "high." Doct ors use the word for the kind of abnormal or inappropriate high spirit s that might be caused by a drug or by mental illness, buteuphoria is usually natural and appropriate. When we win enough money in the lot tery to buy several small Pacific islands, or even just when the home team wins the championship, we have good reason to feel euphoric.
 
eulogy             (1) A formal speech or writing especially in honor of a dead person. (2) High praise.


E.g.
 The book was a fond eulogy to the 1950s, when Americans had joined social organizations of all kinds.


With it s -logy ending (see LOG), eulogy means literally something like "good speech." We are t old to speak only good of the dead, buta eulogistactually makes a speech in the dead person's honor-or often instead for  someone living, who mightactually be there in the audience. The most famous eulogies include Lincoln's Get tysburg Address and Pericles' funeral oration for the Athenian warriors; but these are only two of the many greateulogies, which continue to be delivered not only at funerals and memorial services butatretirement parties, anniversary parties, and birthday parties.
 
DYS comes from Greek, where it means "bad" or "difficult ." So dysphagia is difficult swallowing, and dyspnea is difficult or labored breathing. Dysphasia is an inability to use and understand language because of injury to or disease of the brain. Dys- is sometimes close in meaning to dis- (see DIS), but try not to confuse the t wo.
 
dyst opia                      An imaginary place where people lead dehumanized and often fearful lives.


E.g.
 For a 10-year-old British boy, boarding school could be a grim dyst opia, with no comfort s, harsh punishment s, and constant bullying.


Dystopia was created from Ut opia, the name of an ideal country imagined by Sir Thomas More in 1516. For More, the suffix -topia meant "place" (see TOP), and u- (from the Greek root ou) meant "no," butalso perhaps "good" (see EU). In other words, More's Ut opia was t oo good to be true. It 's probably no accident that dystopia was first used around 1950, soon after George Orwell published  his famous novel Nineteen Eighty-Four and 16 years after Aldous Huxley published Brave New World. These two are still the most famous of the 20th century's many depressingly dystopian novels. And whataboutall those bleak futuristic films: Blade Runner, Brazil, The Matrix, and the rest E.g.
 What  does it mean when no one will paint  a picture of a happy futureE.g.

 
dyslexia                  A disturbance or interference with the ability to read or to use language.


E.g.
 She managed to deal with her dyslexia through careful t ut oring all throughoutelementary school.


Dyslexia is  a  neurological  disorder  that  usually  affect s  people  of  average  or  superior intelligence. Dyslexic individuals have an impaired ability to recognize and process words and let ters. Dyslexia usually shows it self in the tendency to read and write words and let ters in reversed order; sometimes similar reversals occur in the person's speech. Dyslexia has been shown to be treatable through patientinstruction in proper reading techniques.
 
dyspeptic
 (1) Relating to or suffering from indigestion. (2) Having an irritable temperament ; ill-humored.


E.g.
 For decades the dyspeptic columnist served as the newspaper's-and the city's-resident grouch.


Dyspepsia comes from the Greek word for "bad digestion." Interestingly, the Greek verb pessein can mean either "to cook" or "to digest "; bad cooking has been responsible for a lot of dyspepsia. Dyspepsia can be caused by many diseases, but dyspeptic individuals are often the victims of their own habit s and appetites. Worry, overeating, inadequate chewing, and excessive smoking and drinking can all bring on dyspepsia. Today we generally use dyspeptic to mean "irritable"-thatis, in the kind of mood that could be produced by bad digestion.
 
dysplasia
    Abnormal  development  of  cells  or  organs,  or  an  abnormal structure resulting from such growth.


E.g.
 The infant was born with minor hip dysplasia, which was fixed by a routine operation.


Of the dozens of medical terms that begin with the dys- prefix, dysplasia (with the suffix - plasia, meaning "development ") is one of the more common, though not many nondoct ors know it . Structural dysplasias are usually something you're born with; they often involve the hip or the kidneys. But cell dysplasia is often associated with cancer. And a dysplastic mole-a mole thatchanges shape in an odd way-is always something to be concerned about .
 

 
Latin Borrowings

a fortiori
      All the more certainly.


E.g.
 If drug users are going to be subject to mandat ory sentences, then, a fortiori, drug dealers should be subject to them also.


A fortiori in Latin literally means "from the stronger (argument )." The term is used when drawing a conclusion that 's even more obvious or convincing than the one just drawn. Thus, if teaching English grammar to native speakers is difficult , then, a fortiori, teaching English grammar to nonnative speakers will be even more challenging.
 
a  posteriori
  Relating to or  derived  by  reasoning  from  known  or observed fact s.


E.g.
 Most President s will come to the a posteriori conclusion thata booming economy is entirely due to their own economic policies.


A posteriori , Latin for "from the lat ter," is a term from logic, which usually refers to reasoning that works backward from an effect to it s causes. This kind of reasoning can sometimes lead to false conclusions. The fact that sunrise  follows the  crowing of a  rooster, for example, doesn't necessarily mean that the rooster's crowing caused the sun to rise.
 
a priori
 Relating to or derived by reasoning from self-evident propositions.


E.g.
 Her colleagues rejected the a priori argument  because it  rested on assumptions they felt weren't necessarily true.


A priori, Latin for "from the former," is traditionally contrasted with a posteriori (see above). The term usually describes lines of reasoning or argument s that proceed from the general to the particular, or from causes to effect s. Whereas a posteriori knowledge is knowledge based solely on experience or personal observation, a priori knowledge is knowledge that comes from the power of reasoning based on self-evident truths. So, for example, "Every mother has had a child" is an a priori statement , since it shows simple logical reasoning and isn'ta statement of factabouta specific case (such as "This woman is the mother of five children") that the speaker knew about from experience.
 
bona fide                           (1) Made in good faith, without deceit . (2) Authentic or genuine.


E.g.
 According to the broker, they've made a bona fide offer to buy the property.


Bona fide means "in good faith" in Latin. When applied to business deals and the like, it stresses the absence  of fraud  or deception. A bona fide sale of securities is an entirely aboveboard transaction. Out side of business and law, bona fide implies mere sincerity and earnest ness. A bona fide promise is one that  the person has every intention of keeping. A bona fide proposal of marriage is one made by a suit or who isn't kidding around. Bona fide also has the noun form bona fides; when someone asks about someone else's bona fides, it usually means evidence of their qualifications or achievement s.
 
carpe diem                           Enjoy the pleasures or opport unities of the moment without concern about the future.


E.g.
 When he learned the phrase "Carpe diem" in high-school Latin class, he knew he'd found the mot to he would live by for the rest of his life.


Carpe diem, a phrase that comes from the Roman poethorace, means literally "Pluck the day," though it 's usually translated as "Seize the day." A free translation might be "Enjoy yourself while you have the chance." For some people, Carpe diem serves as the closest thing to a philosophy of life as they'll ever have.
 
caveatempt or
          Let the buyer beware.


E.g.
 The bestrule to keep in mind when buying anything from a pushcartis: "Caveatempt or."


"Withouta warranty, the buyer must take the risk" is the basic meaning of the phrase caveatemptor. In the days when buying and selling was carried on in the local market place, the rule was a practical one. Buyer and seller knew each other and were on equal footing. The nature of modern commerce and technology placed the buyer ata disadvantage, however, so a stack of regulations have been writ ten by federal, state, and local agencies to protect the consumer against dangerous or defective product s, fraudulent practices, and the like. But the principle thata buyer needs a warranty if he is to avoid risk remains an important legal concept . Note thata caveatis a small warning or explanation intended to avoid misinterpretation.
 
corpus delicti
     (1) The substantial and basic fact or fact s necessary to prove thata crime has been commit ted. (2) The material substance, such as the murdered body, on which a crime has been commit ted.


E.g.
 The police believed they had solved the crime, but couldn't prove their case without the corpus delicti.


Corpus delicti literally means "body of the crime" in Latin. In it s original sense, the body in question refers not to a corpse but to the body of essential fact s that , taken t ogether, prove thata crime has been commit ted. In popular usage, corpus delicti also refers to the actual physical object upon which a crime has been commit ted. In a case of arson, it would be a ruined building; in a murder case, the victim's corpse.
 
curriculum   vitae
   A  short   summary   of   one's   career  and qualifications, typically prepared by an applicant for a position; r¨¦sum¨¦.


E.g.
 The job advertisementasked for an up-t o-date curriculum vitae and three recommendations.


The Latin phrase curriculum vitae, often abbreviated CV, literally means "the course of one's life." The term is usually used for applications for jobs in the sciences and medicine and for teaching positions in colleges and universities. A shorter term is simply vita, meaning "life." In other fields, r¨¦sum¨¦ is more commonly used in the U.S.; in England, however, curriculum vitae is the usual term for any job application.
 

 

 
